[Amit Varma]: Every time you say something you should be amazed. It's a miracle.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm not remarking on the quality of your words. I'm not even mocking you in
[Amit Varma]: some passive-aggressive way. I'm just pointing out that the fact that we can
[Amit Varma]: speak to each other, that we have language is so remarkable. Part of the
[Amit Varma]: wonder of this is what our brains can achieve in terms of learning how to
[Amit Varma]: communicate in this manner. And part of this awe I feel is because of language
[Amit Varma]: itself. Our languages were not formed out of nothing in a language lab somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: They were not designed by committee. Instead they arose over centuries, formed
[Amit Varma]: by millions of interactions, shaped by other languages and cultures that are no
[Amit Varma]: more. Every time we say something, no matter what it is that we say, we are in
[Amit Varma]: a sense expressing all of human history before us. From the first migrants out of
[Amit Varma]: Africa to the last thought that you had. Our very words are shaped by the inner
[Amit Varma]: lives of the dead and the undead, by the past and the present, by the seen and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on
[Unknown]: economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit
[Amit Varma]: Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. My guest today is Peggy Mohan, linguist,
[Amit Varma]: music teacher and author of a remarkable book called Wanderer's King's Merchants,
[Amit Varma]: the story of India through its languages. This book was an eye-opener for me in
[Amit Varma]: revealing how language evolves and also of how India evolved through the story
[Amit Varma]: of its languages. We've heard simple narratives about Indian language before,
[Amit Varma]: how Sanskrit is part of a larger family of Indo-Aryan languages, sharing an
[Amit Varma]: ancestor called Proto-Indo-European with Latin and Greek. I was taught in school
[Amit Varma]: that a bunch of Indian languages like Hindi, Marathi and Bengali are derived
[Amit Varma]: from Sanskrit, while the South Indian languages are in a separate language
[Amit Varma]: family. Well, the truth is far more nuanced and our languages are even more
[Amit Varma]: of a khichdi than you'd imagine. For example, Sanskrit has a bunch of sounds
[Amit Varma]: called retroflex sounds, the T and D as opposed to the T and D, which are not
[Amit Varma]: there in any of the other Indo-Aryan languages. Retroflex sounds are unique to
[Amit Varma]: South Asia. So what happened here? What was the landscape of languages here when
[Amit Varma]: the Aryans came to India? How does Sanskrit evolve within that landscape?
[Amit Varma]: Why is a language like Marathi so similar to some of the Dravidian
[Amit Varma]: languages? Is there a clue in the evolution of more recent languages? For
[Amit Varma]: example, Peggy writes in a book about how new languages evolved in the Caribbean
[Amit Varma]: due to the slave trade. Slaves were brought to the Caribbean from West
[Amit Varma]: Africa. They formed a jugaru kind of language, borrowing nouns from their
[Amit Varma]: masters, called pigeon languages. And then the next generation gave these pigeon
[Amit Varma]: languages a structure, an operating system as it were, which had more in
[Amit Varma]: common with West African languages than with the French or English or Spanish
[Amit Varma]: from which they borrowed nouns. These languages were called Creoles. In a
[Amit Varma]: similar way, Indian languages often have an external addressing of a particular
[Amit Varma]: type, but an underlying operating system from somewhere else. How much can we
[Amit Varma]: understand of this now? How much can we tell about our past from the way our
[Amit Varma]: language is in the present time? What deeper truths about our society and
[Amit Varma]: culture can language reveal? Peggy's book is a fundamental book if you want to
[Amit Varma]: begin exploring these subjects and I love my conversation with her. Before we
[Amit Varma]: get there though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode is about language. Peggy Mohan's wonderful book is about language
[Amit Varma]: and if you want to learn even more about the history and evolution of languages, I
[Amit Varma]: have a recommendation for you. Head on over to the sponsors of this episode
[Amit Varma]: Vondrium at Vondrium.com and check out this great program called The Story of
[Amit Varma]: Human Language. In 36 fascinating episodes, the brilliant professor and
[Amit Varma]: writer John McWhorter takes us through the journey of human language from the
[Amit Varma]: single language spoken 300,000 years ago to the thousands of rich and diverse
[Amit Varma]: languages we speak today. He speaks about the birth of language, the evolution of
[Amit Varma]: languages, how dialects form, how pigeons lead to Creoles, how languages die and
[Amit Varma]: even the birth of artificial languages in these modern times. Now, Vondrium used
[Amit Varma]: to be known as a Great Courses Plus who have sponsored many episodes of The
[Amit Varma]: Seen and The Unseen. I love browsing through Vondrium because it has all the
[Amit Varma]: great courses from The Great Courses Plus and videos and documentaries created
[Amit Varma]: in partnership with National Geographic, The Smithsonian, The Culinary Institute
[Amit Varma]: of America and so on. It's such a great place to learn and you can get 14 days
[Amit Varma]: of unlimited free access if you use the following URL Vondrium.com slash unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Let me spell that out for you. W-O-N-D-R-I-U-M.com slash unseen. U-N-S-E-E-N. Sign up now
[Amit Varma]: for free and free your mind. Peggy, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. Thank
[Amit Varma]: you, glad to be here. I loved reading your book and I was
[Amit Varma]: especially struck by something in the first chapter where you talk about a
[Amit Varma]: tiramisu bear. So I'm just going to read that little bit out because I love that
[Amit Varma]: passage where you say, quote, travelers to the Canadian Arctic have been coming
[Amit Varma]: back with tales of a new kind of bear in the wild that one could almost call a
[Amit Varma]: tiramisu bear. It has a layered look like the Italian desert with cream colored
[Amit Varma]: fur on top and coffee brown paws. Its snout is slender like a polar bear's but
[Amit Varma]: it has a broad and muscular shoulders of a grizzly. Its feet are something in
[Amit Varma]: between the furry soles of a polar bear which give good traction on snow and ice
[Amit Varma]: and the planar pads of a grizzly which can withstand the friction of walking on
[Amit Varma]: barren ground. Stop quote. Now this has many resonances through your book with
[Amit Varma]: you know different subjects like migration, conquest, language, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But what I was particularly intrigued by is when you say that you are a tiramisu
[Amit Varma]: bear. So let's start by talking about the personal. Tell me a bit about your
[Amit Varma]: childhood and why are you a tiramisu bear? Well, it's an interesting thought
[Guest]: because when I start with a Canadian polar bear and the idea of a grizzly
[Guest]: bear it's almost humorous metaphor of my parents because my mom was from a place
[Guest]: in Canada where you could possibly conceivably find a polar bear and it was
[Guest]: an island off the coast of Canada, Newfoundland, and she went as a student
[Guest]: to Canada and that's where my father who was Indian from the Caribbean met her
[Guest]: and like migrants in early days he was a student planning to go back home. He
[Guest]: didn't see anything strange about falling in love with her and marrying
[Guest]: her because the first migrants generally do only find women from the local
[Guest]: community and I think in both of them were so averse to anything that could be
[Guest]: considered racist that they wouldn't hesitate for a moment to think that they
[Guest]: should get married and then my mom went back with him to the Caribbean and as I
[Guest]: said in the book never ever saw snow again. So in a funny way even my story
[Guest]: repeats because I've left the Caribbean and gone to India and here's my daughter
[Guest]: who's with me who's left India and gone to California so it's like we are all
[Guest]: migrants in my family and tiramisu bear gives a sense of a very predictable kind
[Guest]: of mixing. So the mixing in languages as with bears always has the male as the
[Guest]: migrant, the female as the one encountered there, and when you look at
[Guest]: the languages you find the men are sperm donors of vocabulary not very hands-on
[Guest]: parents and the women are the ones who incubate and raise the offspring and
[Guest]: perhaps even see the words all change from what they taught the child in the
[Guest]: early years. So you have these kinds of languages where if you're not looking
[Guest]: for it you will miss it but the entire grammatical structure and a lot of the
[Guest]: sounds are there from the woman because they raise the children until about the
[Guest]: age of five after which men might say I want the boys, the boys are us, the girls
[Guest]: are not. So if you look at the languages you'll find this pattern in so many
[Guest]: parts of the world not just India, India is just the latest one I found where you
[Guest]: find a huge grammatical infrastructure we could say operating system which is
[Guest]: installed where words can shift and the words tend to come from whoever's in
[Guest]: power who initiated the contact who well who created the need for a hybrid to
[Guest]: come into existence at all. So okay on the one hand yes I'm talking about
[Guest]: myself, I'm talking about migrants, I'm talking about languages because when you
[Guest]: look at languages you can almost forensically say this is what has to
[Guest]: have happened because I'm seeing the grammar from one place which seems very
[Guest]: local and I'm seeing the words from another place. So you have a tendency to
[Guest]: say that I can completely reconstruct the story of how the contact took place.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah that's that's fascinating and there are you know in your book you even talk
[Amit Varma]: about this tribe in Africa where you know the men speak one language and the
[Amit Varma]: women speak another language entirely. That's in the Caribbean and in fact I
[Guest]: had to study that language it was a very strange experience because and I made
[Guest]: friends with the person who was teaching it but it's something that happened in
[Guest]: in the island of St. Vincent back in oh the year 1200 that's before Columbus. So
[Guest]: and this apparently it happened very often because you have things like men
[Guest]: or shall I say marauders going from island to island doing away with the men
[Guest]: even a book I'm reading now about the conquests of Alexander they talk of
[Guest]: things like slaughtering all the men taking all the women. So you have these
[Guest]: kinds of hybrid situations so this is actually a Carib language. Carib and
[Guest]: Arawak from the Caribbean yeah. Fascinating let's you know all of these
[Amit Varma]: seems are the things that I want to explore in great detail both migration
[Amit Varma]: how languages come into being all of that but let's kind of go back to your
[Amit Varma]: personal journey so you know you're you're kind of growing up in the
[Amit Varma]: Caribbean as a kid what are you interested in as a kid what are you
[Amit Varma]: reading what are you doing like later on of course you go to study linguistics
[Amit Varma]: but how does that interest develop you you're also a teacher of music are you a
[Amit Varma]: musical kid a lot of people will of course know you through your books and
[Amit Varma]: your work and all of that but give me a sense of the person beyond that you know
[Guest]: your early phase as it were. Okay let's see if I can reconstruct that too. I grew
[Guest]: up in what you would call a joint Indian family in the countryside in Trinidad my
[Guest]: great-grandfather was alive my grandmother and some of her younger
[Guest]: siblings and so and my another generation it was just a huge amount of
[Guest]: people and my mother who was the youngest daughter-in-law and who'd come
[Guest]: from abroad and everyone spoke Creole English which is somewhat similar to
[Guest]: Jamaican English and I would hear whiffs of Hindi and of course Bhojpuri now my
[Guest]: grandmother great-grandfather all these older people were educated they'd
[Guest]: studied Hindi so they've made it a point that they want to speak Hindi they
[Guest]: didn't want me to learn it because there was a very strong feeling that that was
[Guest]: something we were leaving behind the whole identity of having come as
[Guest]: migrants from India okay that too we were migrants from India in between 1849
[Guest]: and 1919 quite a lot of Indians mainly from eastern UP a small number from
[Guest]: western Bihar a small number from the south went as bonded labor to the
[Guest]: plantations in Trinidad because slavery was over and Trinidad was one of those
[Guest]: islands where any were any Africans who were freed had other options this was a
[Guest]: large enough place it wasn't like say Barbados where there was nowhere to go
[Guest]: so you stayed on the estate so whenever there were options and Africans could
[Guest]: either set up their own communities in other parts more remote parts of the
[Guest]: island there was no labor so Indians were brought over among them my family
[Guest]: and in fact when I think of where we came from when I went to India I used the
[Guest]: word I said okay I know it's somewhere Faisalabad but the town mentioned is
[Guest]: Ajodhapur is there a place near Faisalabad by that name say Ayodhya
[Guest]: that you're from Ayodhya yes and I still can speak like that and that was some of
[Guest]: my earlier work but let's see if I can get you back to what it was like in a
[Guest]: joint family where you're hearing Hindi you're hearing Bhojpuri because the old
[Guest]: ones would speak to older people who came in in this dialect Spanish was very
[Guest]: close you could see Venezuela from some parts of Trinidad in fact if you logged
[Guest]: on a few minutes earlier you'd have heard me speaking in Spanish to someone
[Guest]: here I'm in Mexico and it's just sort of like going from being right-handed to
[Guest]: being left-handed and French I studied but my mother was spent part of a life
[Guest]: in Quebec so I knew French also so there were all these things going on I studied
[Guest]: Latin my father loved Latin so the European type languages and Creole were
[Guest]: very accessible to me I could understand them that's my first language was Creole
[Guest]: Hindi and Bhojpuri were less so they were kept away from me and I was
[Guest]: resentful I kept wondering why can't I learn these things and they were
[Guest]: desperately trying to see that I moved ahead into the modern world and not
[Guest]: backward into whatever life we'd had before and it's only when I started
[Guest]: doing linguistics and opting to study Bhojpuri and learning Hindi a little
[Guest]: bit here and there from courses that they kind of figured that I wasn't going
[Guest]: to backslide into being a bonded laborer and they helped me a little and so much
[Guest]: so that my great-grandfather said to me okay you can learn Devanagari if
[Guest]: you want learn it on your own I'm going to teach you something else and he
[Guest]: taught me an almost extinct script called Kayathi which you might have
[Guest]: heard of which is for very little seen in India and I would sit there forming
[Guest]: the letters as a child and thinking that India was something that I knew about
[Guest]: from my grandmother and great-grandfather so all of this was going on I did
[Guest]: linguistics and that was a time in the West Indies when the whole Creole thing
[Guest]: was coming up and the language that we thought was just bad English or bad
[Guest]: French was suddenly being seen as an interesting hybrid and since we knew the
[Guest]: history on the one hand of slavery and on the other hand we could look at these
[Guest]: languages and we could see exactly what us the tiramisu bear look that I had
[Guest]: mentioned in the beginning so this was going on all around me and as I did
[Guest]: linguistics in the West Indies and then I went on to University of Michigan to
[Guest]: do my PhD in linguistics ideas what should I do so I've done a lot of
[Guest]: linguistics courses so one of the things I thought I might as well get in with
[Guest]: you know as it is scoring subject to have some Sanskrit so I got into
[Guest]: Sanskrit was it was scoring but I mean I worked non-stop at it I had to actually
[Guest]: pull myself away from it to get on with writing a dissertation myself and then I
[Guest]: decided that I would get back to the Caribbean work on the language that
[Guest]: Indians had taken there and first describe it and then look at something
[Guest]: completely different from how languages are born I looked at how they died do
[Guest]: they all die in the same way do they die quickly or do they die gradually all
[Guest]: these were questions that were coming up and they were linked also to do
[Guest]: languages come up gradually or do they just within a generation emerge into the
[Guest]: sunlight so these were the kinds of things that were going on in my mind
[Guest]: growing up I must have had some interest in language because as a child I
[Guest]: remember the moment standing in our backyard when I first pronounced her and
[Guest]: I knew that I was not a baby anymore it was not actually her that was being
[Guest]: passed off as and you to remember that you're about six or seven years old and
[Guest]: the first time you make a difficult sound so clearly I was on my way to
[Amit Varma]: being a linguist you have many fascinating strands and by the way you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned Kathy and in your book you've got a lovely sort of illustration of
[Amit Varma]: what Kathy is like and you point out how Kathy at one time was the most popular
[Amit Varma]: script for writing Hindi and it wasn't Devanagari Devanagari came later and you
[Amit Varma]: know one of the things I realize when I read about history is how much it seems
[Amit Varma]: to us that everything that is perhaps a convention in the present time it almost
[Amit Varma]: feels in our mind as if it must have always been the case whereas actually
[Amit Varma]: what we are looking at is just a snapshot the things have changed
[Amit Varma]: radically so fast and if you just go a little bit back in time you know things
[Amit Varma]: were actually incredibly different and everything we take for granted was you
[Amit Varma]: know almost came about through a variety of different accidents coming together
[Amit Varma]: and creating a perfect storm which kind of brings you here before I get back on
[Amit Varma]: you know asking about your personal arc a broader question also about language
[Amit Varma]: which I have thought about a bit but I've never actually managed to speak
[Amit Varma]: with an expert and actually bring this question up which is that just as
[Amit Varma]: someone who reads a lot and mostly in translation obviously except you know I
[Amit Varma]: can read Hindi but otherwise I'm reading all other languages translated into
[Amit Varma]: English it strikes me that different languages have different essences so to
[Amit Varma]: say which makes them almost in a sense untranslatable I did an episode on
[Amit Varma]: translation with the translator Aruna Vasina who translates from Bengali to
[Amit Varma]: English and this is one of the things we discussed where it strikes me that if
[Amit Varma]: you look at the literature in some languages like Japanese and Korean
[Amit Varma]: they'll tend to be very kind of stark and minimal and spare while if you look
[Amit Varma]: at other languages like Urdu and Bengali you know they're very
[Amit Varma]: expressionistic and maximalist and all of that and if you were to just do a
[Amit Varma]: direct word-for-word translation into a language like English which kind of has
[Amit Varma]: values of its own and all of that it would seem incredibly odd so the
[Amit Varma]: question that sort of strikes me is that one I'm sure you'd agree that languages
[Amit Varma]: do have different essences and all of that but where does that arise from like
[Amit Varma]: does sound play a big part in that just the way that they sound and does that
[Amit Varma]: then have consequences down the road you know because of the character or what
[Amit Varma]: you can express is shaped by the language then you would expect that the
[Amit Varma]: character of a society or a people is also shaped by that and we often don't
[Amit Varma]: think about this now you're someone who's not only grown up in a very
[Amit Varma]: multilingual environment but you've also traveled a lot lived in different parts
[Amit Varma]: of the world and studied language so what are your sort of thoughts on this
[Guest]: see I wouldn't go so far as to say it's the sounds the sounds are there of
[Guest]: course but it is true that languages have a very different I think you use the
[Guest]: word essence sort of that that's a good word because today on my Facebook feeds
[Guest]: came up something I had written some years ago for Biblio and I was it
[Guest]: started with me comparing what I had read as a 17 year old in Spanish as part
[Guest]: of being a student of BA Spanish French linguistics a hundred years of solitude
[Guest]: I read it and it seemed like every other book I read in Spanish because I was
[Guest]: just very familiar with what everybody else exalts over now and calls magic
[Guest]: realism it just seemed like since the 14th 15th century that's the kind of
[Guest]: stuff that they have been writing so I read through it and didn't think much
[Guest]: and then my daughter many years later said it's an awesome book and she'd read
[Guest]: it in English and I decided to read it in English and the strangeness and the
[Guest]: eeriness came out only in the translation because until then it was
[Guest]: just a simple normal way that one writes in Spanish be it writers from Cuba
[Guest]: writers from Spain writers from different parts of Latin America he just
[Guest]: got very spotlighted and the normalcy of that kind of style or the way he
[Guest]: expressed himself just didn't come out in English in fact it came out as a plus
[Guest]: it looked Wow magic and it wasn't magic it's just a way everyone seemed to write
[Guest]: so that's very hard to put across to people that the first time I read a
[Guest]: hundred years of solitude it was just it was a pale echo of some of the other
[Guest]: writers I had liked from Latin America because they all had this quality of the
[Guest]: grotesque in the writing and that had to do I think it's more to do with a kind
[Guest]: of social situation you grew up in a sense of hopelessness at times you see
[Guest]: for example why did Ghalib write the way he did I mean don't you now in a fraught
[Guest]: political situation find yourself writing cryptically and not completing
[Guest]: words or using allusions rather than direct words so a lot of this has to do
[Guest]: with the milieu you're writing in as to speech I can't say of course there are a
[Guest]: lot of other things going on why do some languages sound different from others
[Guest]: well there are lots of reasons for it why does Bengali sound different from
[Guest]: Hindi completely different antecedents because the migrations into Bengal were
[Guest]: quite different from the migrations that made their way towards Delhi so all of
[Guest]: that colors the kind of character language would have I would say the
[Guest]: sounds started the sounds may capture a bit of it but it starts from a much more
[Amit Varma]: complex place yeah I mean multifactorial and and and just speaking of you know
[Amit Varma]: hundred years of solitude I think it was translated by Gregory Rabasa and and a
[Amit Varma]: lot of people hold Rabasa sort of in tremendous regard because they feel that
[Amit Varma]: the translation is almost like a new creation of its own and I often yeah and
[Amit Varma]: I often see that in you know a lot of the some of the Indian translators who
[Amit Varma]: translate from languages which I would have thought that you know how do you
[Amit Varma]: even translate it but if you look at you know Arvind Krishnamoorthra
[Amit Varma]: translating Kabir or Ranjith Hoskote translating Lal Dey and it's just as if
[Amit Varma]: they've created some magic of their own they haven't just done a literal
[Amit Varma]: translation because that would simply not work but they've created a magic of
[Amit Varma]: their own with what they've done which is fascinating so just kind of going
[Amit Varma]: back to your personal journey it again growing up what was your conception of
[Amit Varma]: yourself and how did it differ from the other kids around you with whom you're
[Amit Varma]: going to school because obviously you've got kind of more influences coming in
[Amit Varma]: from different places where your mother is a polar bear as you say in the
[Amit Varma]: metaphor to take the metaphor forward and your whole family has that history
[Amit Varma]: of speaking Bhojpuri Hindi they're from a different place and you're there in
[Amit Varma]: the Caribbean and does it shape your view of the world in a way that is then
[Amit Varma]: conducive towards becoming the sort of person that you would later become where
[Amit Varma]: you're traveling the world and an international citizen of sorts with the
[Amit Varma]: curiosity towards other cultures so did you feel that there was that difference
[Amit Varma]: and that that difference was a fortuitous thing in terms of shaping
[Amit Varma]: what you would go on to do and all of those things that's hard to say maybe
[Guest]: the final outcome yes as a young child I would look in the mirror and say that
[Guest]: what I saw didn't look like any of the things that are supposed to be there I
[Guest]: didn't see an Indian and I definitely did not want to see a Canadian I was
[Guest]: Caribbean but I didn't look like a lot of other Caribbeans so I had to put the
[Guest]: whole question in a box and hide it away for some years until I was able to deal
[Guest]: in any way with it maybe I haven't even taken it out of the box I've just let it
[Guest]: continue and in India for a long time I have an Indian passport and people would
[Guest]: ask me where are you from and I'd say Delhi because I've lived in Delhi for
[Guest]: what more than 40 years and I'd feel hurt when people would say no but where
[Guest]: are you really from you know everywhere I'd go I would try to blend in in some
[Guest]: way which is why like when I hear people telling me in Mexico your Spanish has no
[Guest]: accent is it what you mean no accent my Hindi has no accent to some extent I
[Guest]: guess I'm told that my objective has always been to try to find a home for
[Guest]: myself wherever I go to fit in until one day my daughter said to me why are you
[Guest]: doing this you know when people ask you in India where are you from make their
[Guest]: day it's the first time they've met a foreigner from an exotic place who can
[Guest]: speak to them so just tell them you're from the Caribbean that'll satisfy them
[Guest]: and so people think okay she's from the Caribbean and then they meet someone
[Guest]: else from the Caribbean who's not like me at all so it's not one of those
[Guest]: things that's easy to resolve what my identity is or except that because I've
[Guest]: tried so hard like I took my time learning Hindi I didn't want to ever
[Guest]: make any mistakes I didn't want anyone to listen to it and say be able to make
[Guest]: out that you're from somewhere else so perhaps it made me a little bit more
[Guest]: cautious there are people who just bluster in and just start speaking
[Guest]: mistakes and all that wasn't for me because it was a something much more
[Guest]: complex going on it was a bonding with the place and you can't bond with the
[Guest]: place making mistakes you have to really have the operating system properly in
[Guest]: the head I took time Hindi doesn't give itself up very easily and worse yet
[Guest]: Malayalam I've reached a stage where I could pronounce Malayalam Malayalam and
[Guest]: not have everybody say you got it wrong yeah no my mind was actually blown by
[Amit Varma]: some of the things in your book because I know Hindi and I understand Marathi
[Amit Varma]: and I was actually learning things about grammar and looking at things in new way
[Amit Varma]: from some of the illuminations in your book so that was great you know the
[Amit Varma]: thrust of my question or my observation or whatever also came from this notion
[Amit Varma]: that people who are certain of their identity are often also straightjacketed
[Amit Varma]: by it not just straightjacketed by it in terms of who they are but also in terms
[Amit Varma]: of how they look at others which is why it will be a common question for them to
[Amit Varma]: ask others where are you from or what is your village as the case might be and
[Amit Varma]: and and in one sense I can of course understand the angst of not being
[Amit Varma]: certain of one's identity but it it I feel like it is also in other ways
[Amit Varma]: liberating and liberating in ways that you don't realize it because a lot of
[Amit Varma]: people who are straightjacketed by identity in different ways may not
[Amit Varma]: realize that they are constrained in some way that you know they contain
[Amit Varma]: multitudes but they are thinking of themselves as only one thing so how did
[Amit Varma]: you get into linguistics from here like when you were a kid what did you want to
[Amit Varma]: be and was it just the case that you know you went to college and you found
[Guest]: this an interesting subject and it wasn't when I was 12 years old I think
[Guest]: Time magazine run an issue on Noam Chomsky and I decided right then and
[Guest]: there that all my interest since about the age of eight or so in languages and
[Guest]: how they looked alike could be something far more serious than just philology and
[Guest]: knowing languages or translating I saw what he was talking about deep
[Guest]: structure was one thing I started reading up a bit about him and you have
[Guest]: no idea what it's like to read Chomsky as a young person sometimes I
[Guest]: would end up reading a page five times to get what he was saying he's not a
[Guest]: great writer actually but his ideas are very good so somewhere around then I
[Guest]: decided that I was going to be a linguist and my mother said but from the
[Guest]: sound of what these people are doing in MIT don't you have to be a science
[Guest]: student and I said maybe not let's see but if I need to learn some science for
[Guest]: it I will and as it is you do have to learn some physiology to learn the whole
[Guest]: vocal tract you have to learn a certain amount about the brain because it's all
[Guest]: processed in the brain so suddenly you find yourself very comfortable talking
[Guest]: to medical people or the notion of an operating system and understanding how
[Guest]: computers work because the brain does have a number of those features so from
[Guest]: the time I was 12 I knew I was going to do linguistics and my father worked at
[Guest]: the University of the West Indies and told me a lot about the linguistics
[Guest]: department there and I knew who the professors were going to be and
[Guest]: everything and I knew that's where I was headed so and then afterwards I wanted
[Guest]: to go abroad and do a PhD and I'm actually glad it ended up being the
[Guest]: University of Michigan because if I'd gone somewhere like Stanford or Harvard
[Guest]: I might have been pushed into much more theoretical work which didn't draw on
[Guest]: the things I already knew about which is like hybridization Creole languages
[Guest]: Indian languages dying languages languages being born so I always wanted
[Guest]: to do this and I veered away from it for a while in India because job wise until
[Guest]: I got an Indian passport it wasn't really possible to get a permanent job
[Guest]: as a linguist so now I'm putting out all the things that I've been thinking of
[Guest]: all these years which and it's just a sometimes surprising to me that all
[Guest]: these questions didn't work occur to a whole lot of other people because many
[Guest]: people are working on all these issues to do with Indian languages and somehow
[Guest]: they don't ask that bold question why why are they like this not what are they
[Guest]: like but why what does this tell us about the past it's a bit of a leap and
[Guest]: I think you just have to be a little bit brave or foolish to jump into these
[Amit Varma]: questions so what I loved about your book was about how through language
[Amit Varma]: almost carrying out a forensic act as it were how through language you've looked
[Amit Varma]: at history you looked at humanity you know it reveals so much about us not
[Amit Varma]: just about our history but perhaps even about our essential nature and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth how we respond to incentives how politics plays a part you met you
[Amit Varma]: know you contrasted Amir Khusrow and Ghalib which is quite a sort of stunning
[Amit Varma]: and revelatory contrast there and my question is that when you started out in
[Amit Varma]: linguistics at that time what was a field like like I discovered Chomsky's
[Amit Varma]: work through reading Steven Pinker's The Language Instinct and then went down
[Unknown]: that kind of rabbit hole where I read up a little bit and all of it was very
[Amit Varma]: fascinating the innate structures and how we deal with language and all of
[Amit Varma]: that but I haven't really come across much work of the kind that is in your
[Amit Varma]: book which is possibly and just an illustration of how ill-read I am but
[Amit Varma]: tell me a bit about the linguistics profession itself and how it has evolved
[Amit Varma]: because one of the things that strikes me and certainly in fields that I know a
[Amit Varma]: little bit more about like economics or political theory or whatever one of the
[Amit Varma]: things you do realize is that within academia there are often these trends
[Amit Varma]: and fashions and you know leitmotifs of the time which carry through and they
[Amit Varma]: there's a subtle pressure on new people coming into those field to do certain
[Amit Varma]: things and not do other things and to follow certain lines of inquiry and not
[Amit Varma]: follow others was there something like that in linguistics watch what were your
[Amit Varma]: natural interests did you feel constrained at any point give me a sense
[Amit Varma]: of the evolution of the field over the last 30 40 years okay our first year was
[Guest]: very simple you have to learn the nuts and bolts of phonetics phonemics
[Guest]: morphology they throw you problems with languages you've never seen before like
[Guest]: Turkish or Swahili those are favored ones because they're easy enough to cut
[Guest]: in you know and segment and see this ending refers to this so we learn the
[Guest]: nuts and bolts of linguistics first and by the second year we were getting
[Guest]: exposed to the kind of professors who were working on hybridization
[Guest]: creolization and various aspects of it how the languages came into existence
[Guest]: was one and the other one was how they were changing in real time something
[Guest]: similar to the Hinglish continuum you're getting in Hindi and English in North
[Guest]: India we get that in the Caribbean so trying to understand how people make
[Guest]: slow transitions from simply one language to another so these were two
[Guest]: big things that were happening in the Caribbean at that time one got sucked
[Guest]: into it and I don't think I resisted it because I found it very exciting because
[Guest]: all of a sudden here you are a young student undergraduate with the kind of
[Guest]: people who are shaping an important part of the field and here you are in it and
[Guest]: I got out of it in a way by getting into the Indian language that we spoke which
[Guest]: is Bhojpuri and that had to be done but to eventually be able to back off and
[Guest]: pull the whole thing together was something that I dreamed of doing for
[Guest]: all these years I've been sitting doing other things and looking at it out of
[Guest]: the corner of my eye the field of linguistics has undergone all kinds of
[Guest]: changes from the excitement of Chomsky and that language was very much
[Guest]: associated with how the brain functioned and located in various parts of the
[Guest]: brain all of that was a season and then came the cutbacks in the budgets and all
[Guest]: sorts of things stopped being done in the US we were pushed towards very functional
[Guest]: things like how to teach English to foreigners or how to deal with language
[Guest]: for computational purposes it got a little bit dry but there was one beauty
[Guest]: to linguistics which kept me in it which is it doesn't cost much if you have to
[Guest]: do research you don't have to set up a Hadron Collider or something there's no
[Guest]: huge budget involved and while travel could be an issue nowadays it isn't
[Guest]: really you want to find out a paper about an obscure language of the Native
[Guest]: Americans in the west of Canada you just go online you go on Facebook you find
[Guest]: someone who's actually done the work when I wanted to crack a few sentences
[Guest]: in Malayalam from a YouTube thing that I had I had a friend who knew Malayalam
[Guest]: and was helping me we just went on on whatsapp we were able to do it sitting
[Guest]: each in our own homes going on to voice recording but when I wanted to crack the
[Guest]: chagatai the opening bits of Baburnama I had a friend in Delhi who is from
[Guest]: Azerbaijan and she and I sat again on whatsapp and she said I don't know how
[Guest]: to describe this sound but I'm gonna just record it for you and and she
[Guest]: recorded I said oh my god is this how he spoke I thought this was extinct in that
[Guest]: part of Central Asia Wow so there's so much that you can do without leaving
[Guest]: your desk without spending a paisa you could really continue doing this kind of
[Guest]: work and it was wonderful because given that in India grants for social sciences
[Guest]: are sort of closing you know you're getting less and less possibility of
[Guest]: doing this kind of work what was nice is that it could you could do it on your
[Guest]: own dime so I continued so it didn't matter that this kind of linguistics was
[Guest]: not being done much or not being encouraged by the granting system I just
[Guest]: knew that I could continue and that in a way the field was open because a large
[Guest]: number of people had simply left you you go by where the grant money is taking
[Amit Varma]: you Wow and and and by the way everything that you said about
[Amit Varma]: communicating with your friend on whatsapp and she recording the sound and
[Amit Varma]: sending it to you it's just so amazing just feels so magical and beautiful to
[Amit Varma]: me connecting like that and almost kind of bringing the dead alive through that
[Amit Varma]: you know when when you kind of realize how Babur spoke during this time while
[Amit Varma]: you were involved in all of this what kind of similar work are you looking at
[Amit Varma]: from your own field or from other fields where you know a lot of the joy I
[Amit Varma]: suppose comes from your own love of different languages and just the
[Amit Varma]: intellectual excitement of figuring out how they work and how they evolve and
[Amit Varma]: all of that but equally there is also that sense of opening doors through
[Amit Varma]: language so were they precedents were there you know books or research that
[Amit Varma]: really excited you and you said that you know this is the kind of thing I want to
[Amit Varma]: do whether using language or whether using other forensic tools or other
[Amit Varma]: frames of looking at it like in a popular writing you know Jared Diamond's
[Amit Varma]: book of course you know gun germs and steels comes into play or but different
[Amit Varma]: people have looked at the past through different prisms most recently you've
[Amit Varma]: had you know all the work of looking at the past through genetics so you know
[Amit Varma]: both in language and in other subjects were there people who kind of inspired
[Amit Varma]: you and said that's the kind of thing I want to do this opened my mind you know
[Amit Varma]: I want to do this is the work that inspires me yes but they generally
[Guest]: weren't linguists they were all the people you're talking about the
[Guest]: geneticists historians there were even people like Stephen Gould who worked on
[Guest]: punctuated equilibria because I was finding my data on language death
[Guest]: impossible to understand I wasn't seeing a slow gradient which you we were told
[Guest]: was there I was finding people either spoke a language or didn't speak it and
[Guest]: the only thing that helped was understanding evolutionary biology and
[Guest]: why species would decline within a generation or come into existence within
[Guest]: a generation languages were doing that too so the metaphor of a lot of other
[Guest]: fields evolutionary biology now genetics there are few others little things of
[Guest]: archaeology I didn't get so much history trying to understand patterns the Vedic
[Guest]: era is quite far back but we have so many other things in India which were
[Guest]: more recent like the migration into Assam the migration into Kerala that you
[Guest]: could see that there were patterns somewhere that if similar things
[Guest]: happened and similar inputs were there now this was not even strictly
[Guest]: linguistics I don't even know how much of it is history how much of it is
[Guest]: genetics but linguists were not writing about this sort of thing they were
[Guest]: writing in smaller little compartments even some of the exciting work in
[Guest]: Sanskrit was linked only to Sanskrit and the practice and so it wasn't looking
[Guest]: beyond that that hey this happened subsequently in India you could get
[Guest]: something out of looking at that too you know so I was looking at a number of
[Guest]: linguists who were working in their tiny citadels and trying to bring it all
[Guest]: together it's hard you know the specialization is something that's
[Guest]: pretty much pushed on you but I felt that what was more interesting to me is
[Guest]: to see how the whole thing worked as a pattern and how the moving parts
[Guest]: functioned and for that I couldn't stick with just Sanskrit or look at I didn't
[Guest]: really look at Assamese except to say that a very similar thing took place or
[Guest]: in various other parts of India but yeah but these were all very different things
[Amit Varma]: that happened. Yeah you mentioned Stephen Jay Gould and
[Amit Varma]: and the first time I read something by Gould was he had written this fabulous
[Amit Varma]: book on baseball statistics which is very odd you you won't imagine an
[Amit Varma]: evolutionary biologist writing about baseball stats but it was just sort of a
[Amit Varma]: new way of looking at that which I found interesting though in the Gould versus
[Amit Varma]: Dawkins debate I kind of usually found myself sympathizing more with Dawkins
[Amit Varma]: but the question here is that what people like Gould demonstrate and so
[Amit Varma]: many other polymath thinkers demonstrate is that they can talk about different
[Amit Varma]: subjects because you can take a frame from one subject and apply it to another
[Amit Varma]: subject like even in your book you've got all these lovely metaphors like you
[Amit Varma]: talk about you know Gould's concept of punctuated equilibria and how languages
[Amit Varma]: show the same kind of thing which you know is going to be my next question to
[Amit Varma]: you but before that my broader question to you is that is this something that is
[Amit Varma]: inherent to you that taking frames from one subject and applying it to look at
[Amit Varma]: the world in general and therefore having a kind of a broader view or is it
[Amit Varma]: something that you feel necessary to cultivate and is it something that you
[Amit Varma]: feel other thinkers and researchers necessarily don't do enough of that you
[Amit Varma]: would advise young people to do that don't just focus on your field and get
[Amit Varma]: really granular but step back a little bit take the broader view look at
[Amit Varma]: society look at this look at that you know and and things will begin to make
[Guest]: sense what are your thoughts on it two thoughts one is just as a dog walks
[Guest]: around and perceives the universe through smell I can walk around on the
[Guest]: barren landscapes of Mexico and see a replay of the Indus Valley civilization
[Guest]: which we know nothing about really we don't even know what they call
[Guest]: themselves and then earlier cultures of Mexico they don't even know what these
[Guest]: people called themselves so you you have this sense that everywhere you go you
[Guest]: sniff and what you sniff is this huge pattern in this universe as to whether
[Guest]: people should get out of their boxes and do it it's hard to say everyone does
[Guest]: what they can and perhaps you just need to see one person do it and be brave
[Guest]: enough and not get slaughtered for it I am astonished that I haven't had more
[Guest]: blows for some of the bold things that I've said young linguists would see that
[Guest]: and probably feel well they've been thinking similar things too but haven't
[Guest]: written them down because what kind of trouble will they get into they have
[Guest]: that that is an issue and if you're in academia to write a book like mine might
[Guest]: not get you the promotions you want although when you're my age to have a
[Guest]: book that's much more accessible to the public is considered a good thing but
[Guest]: not for a young person so as to whether they should do it well can they do it if
[Guest]: you've been like you have no idea how much work has been done in India on the
[Guest]: past tense in all the western parts of India starting with Goa Maharashtra all
[Guest]: the way up through Rajasthan Gujarat the Hindi belt and separately all through
[Guest]: Pakistan with no contact with each other people have studied these languages with
[Guest]: this unusual past tense where the verb agrees with the object and nobody sort
[Guest]: of asked why this belt what is it about this phenomenon people have said yes
[Guest]: it's not the passive food eaten that's the favorite phrase there but nobody's
[Guest]: tried to see why just this area and almost nowhere else so to take it
[Guest]: further back requires the kind of thing that maybe academia wouldn't reward you
[Guest]: for doing stick with the facts and just plod a little bit here and there they're
[Guest]: good I mean these people they've done wonderful studies but to make that leap
[Guest]: to say and add in southern Iran which no longer has it you're talking of the
[Guest]: Harappan people and it's a wonderful exciting thought that all the things in
[Guest]: Hindi that make no sense in terms of Sanskrit come from these same people
[Guest]: that we have no way of finding we are them I found that's just so mind-blowing and then
[Guest]: putting it up there right where you can shoot it down and nobody shot it down
[Guest]: it's an exciting thought but now there are many more linguists in India I see
[Guest]: all the time who could write all these sorts of things and probably were a
[Guest]: little bit timid but they know enough to do it we probably see more of it you
[Amit Varma]: know that's really interesting and it's heartening and it's a valid point that
[Amit Varma]: you make that people are after all driven by incentives so on the one hand
[Amit Varma]: I can imagine someone who's an academia you have the incentives or whatever the
[Amit Varma]: fashions and trends of the academic world are but on the other hand if you're
[Amit Varma]: a linguist in India do you really want to get into trouble at this point in
[Amit Varma]: time by talking about you know how the Arya came into India for example and the
[Amit Varma]: stuff that then went down or the fact that there is a Dravidian belt which
[Amit Varma]: actually extends all the way from southern Iran all the way through you
[Amit Varma]: know Afghanistan Pakistan and all the way to the south kind of bypassing Delhi
[Amit Varma]: which is such a quite Delhi's in it Delhi's in it yeah you kind of said it's
[Guest]: like shading Delhi's lately yeah if I remember yeah glance to Delhi and they're
[Guest]: not not exactly the Dravidians you know from the south there's something
[Amit Varma]: different again about them we don't know who they are yeah and and but that is so
[Amit Varma]: counterintuitive and just saying something like that I imagine in present
[Amit Varma]: day India would kind of get into trouble like I just think of all the
[Amit Varma]: controversies poor Tony Joseph got into after writing early Indians it is based
[Guest]: on such solid science but why I mean I'm surprised that he did I think that anyone
[Guest]: okay I'm gonna take a little bold step here now I'm surprised I have got into
[Guest]: no trouble I think partly I've just gone step by step and only stuck with what I
[Guest]: can verify I wasn't yes like Tony Joseph here and there it's other people's
[Guest]: research that one is dependent on but I have not overtly expressed a political
[Guest]: position I have not tried to beat anyone I have not if anything I've offered you
[Guest]: something better you want to be Aria I think that's real small time I'm so
[Guest]: excited at being her up and I've given you something better you know and when
[Guest]: you say did the Vedic people come to India or leave India and I show a
[Guest]: pattern of a small settlement in the northwest it's beginning to spread
[Guest]: eastwards and southward and there's a time dimension on it that something
[Guest]: doesn't spread into India if it's the thing that an overtime if it's actually
[Guest]: on the way out but I don't have to actually say it all you have to do is
[Guest]: show the time that from 3700 years ago until when it reached Assam and then
[Guest]: it's going further into Nagaland you're beginning to see things going up into
[Guest]: Sikkim it's an ongoing process so if it's not even stopped how can you say
[Guest]: that this was something that was always there in India and going out it doesn't
[Guest]: make sense but at the same time I've been very clear that until the genetic
[Guest]: studies came and of course looking at it in the way I just looked at it as an
[Guest]: ongoing thing until all these genetic studies came there really was no idea
[Guest]: where these people had come from and people were just throwing words around
[Guest]: they were saying Caucasus, Caucasians what a stupid idea because the Caucasus
[Guest]: has 50 languages of which only three are very iffily related to the Indo-Aryan
[Guest]: languages why the Caucasus and then they start saying maybe Anatolia modern
[Guest]: Turkey all of these were guesses and they talked about Indo-Germanic come on
[Guest]: come on no there was this strong feeling of the colonial era where white people
[Guest]: wanted to say that if there was something interesting about India it has
[Guest]: to have come from Europe or somewhere like that so I why should one accept
[Guest]: that and then later comes the idea of genetic studies which somewhat resolves
[Guest]: it I think it pretty much resolves it for me and what the icing on the cake
[Guest]: being that it's still ongoing and trickling into inward into India so
[Guest]: having put it that way and not tried to bait anybody because I understand why
[Guest]: they would be angry with the earlier notion that there were white people who
[Guest]: came down into India and that and that they took over a huge belt of India now
[Guest]: that that's that's racist stuff yeah so I suspect that that may be why I've seen
[Guest]: people who are known to be supporters of out of India actually nodding as you're
[Guest]: nodding now when they talk of some of what I've written and I'm just
[Guest]: completely overwhelmed because it means that they're thinking about it and they
[Guest]: don't feel in any way excluded or insulted which I don't mean them to be
[Amit Varma]: does that make a kind of sense I'll come up with a counterpoint to that but
[Amit Varma]: before that a quick note for my listeners that you know I've done a
[Amit Varma]: great episode with Tony Joseph who's written the book early Indians a couple
[Amit Varma]: of years back so I'll link it from the show notes and that kind of talks in
[Amit Varma]: great detail about what we have learned in the last few years about our history
[Amit Varma]: through looking at genetic evidence and which is pretty hard to argue with and a
[Amit Varma]: very powerful that's an illuminating book and an illuminating episode as well
[Amit Varma]: but my sort of counterpoint to that is when you say that I only wrote about
[Amit Varma]: what I can verify the truth is not really the point here the point here is
[Amit Varma]: narratives that there is a narrative based on nationalistic pride and it's
[Amit Varma]: got a xenophobic element to it also where the whole narrative is you know
[Amit Varma]: that somehow Aryans are supreme and the out of India theory that you referred to
[Amit Varma]: of course is that there weren't Arya people coming from outside to India but
[Amit Varma]: instead everything began in India Sanskrit is the motherlode and we went
[Amit Varma]: out and everything comes from us and all of that which you know is there is a
[Amit Varma]: sort of narrative of national pride and all that and anything that strikes us
[Amit Varma]: narrative is immediately looked upon very harshly like I have seen the sort
[Amit Varma]: of internet responses that poor Tony got on social media where he clarified many
[Amit Varma]: times in his book that don't call it the Aryan invasion theory you're talking
[Amit Varma]: about Aryan migration and essentially all of India is you know everyone here
[Amit Varma]: is a migrant if you go far back enough you're a migrant from Africa and then
[Amit Varma]: from West Asia and then you have the Harappans and then you have the Aryans
[Amit Varma]: and everything's a big party till a certain point in time where politics
[Amit Varma]: takes over and we have endogamy and all of that and a certain strand of thought
[Amit Varma]: wins out and all of which Tony has explained in a very fascinating way so
[Amit Varma]: in that sense I'm really glad that you haven't gotten into trouble but when you
[Amit Varma]: talk of people who believe in out of India but they're nodding away and
[Amit Varma]: agreeing with you I think that's probably a selection bias which might
[Amit Varma]: have to do with the kind of genteel people and reasonable people you might
[Amit Varma]: encounter but the environment out there is far uglier than that I know yeah and
[Amit Varma]: and I mean nevertheless there's a part of me that is hoping that your book
[Amit Varma]: actually gets into some kind of controversy because that would mean that
[Amit Varma]: more people have read it that's the only reason people would find it worthy of
[Amit Varma]: attacking and I'd love everyone to kind of read the book but that's my little
[Amit Varma]: counterpoint that the rigor of your research or the truth of what you're
[Amit Varma]: saying or the really obvious logical strand that runs through all your
[Amit Varma]: investigations have nothing to do with what the political response will be okay
[Guest]: then then let me add another counterpoint I can't speak for Tony I
[Guest]: can't exactly remember how he started his book but I do remember Wendy
[Guest]: Doniger and Audrey Truska both spent the first few pages snapping wildly at the
[Guest]: present government of India and if you think that trolls read the whole book
[Guest]: they probably are very swayed by what they see in the first few pages my first
[Guest]: few pages were about a grizzly bear and polar bear they must have said is it a
[Guest]: value hey it's me care you know so it's the kind of people who might be trolls
[Guest]: were probably not sure what to make of the book initially and this is not the
[Guest]: first time that's happened to me like when I wrote a book about Gujarat in
[Guest]: basically the Tiffin bomb trial in which I was actually expert witness and at my
[Guest]: book launch there were two guys so three guys who I went up to and I said I don't
[Guest]: know you and thank you for coming and soon disappear from the BJP so I said
[Guest]: oh very nice and because it's all description of tooth of Gujarat before
[Guest]: that 2002 as well starting the book in the train carriage and then they asked
[Guest]: me but would you be willing to write a similar book about 1984 and I said sure
[Guest]: I probably know more about it than you do they backed off they treated a book
[Guest]: which went into incredible detail about what happened in Gujarat in a
[Guest]: fictionalized way even down to what happens in the jail cells it was treated
[Guest]: with just hands off leave it alone I don't know why and in this case again I
[Guest]: don't know why there's enough in my book I think which is more controversial than
[Guest]: some of what Wendy Doniger says but then I'm not looking to fight the government
[Guest]: you know I'm just looking to explore a bunch of theories and maybe the kind of
[Guest]: people who would troll were disappointed or satisfied with the first chapter and
[Guest]: left the book alone I can't tell but it is interesting I still don't know why I
[Amit Varma]: think I kind of know trolls in the social media ecosystem well enough to
[Amit Varma]: say that listen trolls don't read so they would not have read your first
[Amit Varma]: chapter and they would not have read Tony's first chapter either and all they
[Amit Varma]: would know is the one line takeaway they would have been told on whatsapp that
[Amit Varma]: oh Tony is saying that Tamil is older than Sanskrit we which alone would be
[Guest]: enough to make them mad I guess but why wouldn't people be mad because there
[Guest]: are ways of arguing back that when do you say Tamil becomes Tamil and how old
[Guest]: is Sanskrit really and that's a I mean that's the sort of thing I would also
[Amit Varma]: attack but not as a troll yeah too much kind of nuance let's start
[Amit Varma]: talking about some of your really fascinating insights into language and
[Amit Varma]: we were talking about gold earlier and you mentioned punctuated equilibria and
[Amit Varma]: of course the insight there is that we tend to think of evolution as something
[Amit Varma]: really gradual things change slowly incrementally and so on and gold's whole
[Amit Varma]: point was that often it is not like that often the massive changes can just
[Amit Varma]: happen you yeah usually it's not like that that massive changes can just
[Amit Varma]: happen suddenly a species can die out overnight and a new species can just
[Amit Varma]: come up and your point sort of was that that's what happens to languages also
[Amit Varma]: that within a generation a language can die out and equally and this is a
[Amit Varma]: process I found so incredibly fascinating and want you to elaborate on
[Amit Varma]: equally a new language can come up within a generation through the process
[Amit Varma]: of first like a pigeon language and then that becomes Creole and I am familiar
[Amit Varma]: with these terms I've had a vague idea of what they mean but I've never had it
[Amit Varma]: explained to me in such a historical and political sense before and something
[Amit Varma]: that you're speaking of through your personal experience of actually you know
[Amit Varma]: speaking one of the Creole languages growing up speaking that and then to go
[Amit Varma]: back into the past and figure out how the slave trade led to so many new
[Amit Varma]: languages coming up tell me a little bit about this about how these evolve okay
[Guest]: when you want to think about languages or a lot of phenomena species coming up
[Guest]: immediately in a generation's time or dying soon you're talking about not
[Guest]: something wrong with the species itself or the language that causes it to be
[Guest]: weak and ready to die these are all environmental impacts so the environment
[Guest]: changes when it does usually fairly fast if for example there's climate change
[Guest]: you'll find species going extinct because at a certain point they lie them
[Guest]: at migrate away or they'll go extinct and those are both very radical changes
[Guest]: if a country is overrun by the kind of people who make it very difficult for
[Guest]: men folk to live but take the woman that's a very sudden environmental
[Guest]: impact if you're captured taken to the coast of West Africa and spirited
[Guest]: across the Atlantic to live almost forever generation after generation
[Guest]: estranged from Africa that's a sudden environmental impact so these are the
[Guest]: kinds of impacts that tend to be very difficult for communities to adapt to
[Guest]: and when you can't adapt to something you get extinctions or totally new
[Guest]: things coming up which suit the new environment so thus the keyword here
[Guest]: would be environmental there is the perception that things die gradually
[Guest]: because humans die gradually but the human is not the correct metaphor the
[Guest]: metaphor is a species and it's always in response to an environmental impact so
[Guest]: where Stephen Gould came up with this idea though it has many more
[Guest]: applications was when people ask well why aren't there more missing links the
[Guest]: only missing link I could think of is like the duck-billed platypus which is
[Guest]: behaves like a bird has no breasts but it gives milk you know there are very
[Guest]: few such things in the natural order so why don't we get many more of those
[Guest]: answer being because the time frame in which the change took place is so sudden
[Guest]: that it doesn't give scope for enough skeletons it's not like thousands of
[Guest]: years if it's just a few generations then there will be far fewer of the kind
[Guest]: of fossils relics left behind and that seemed very good because there are a lot
[Guest]: of other fields of chemistry mathematics which talk about sudden changes and
[Guest]: leaps and the difficulty of transition between two states and then suddenly
[Guest]: you're in a different phase altogether this is the sort of thing that's
[Guest]: slightly hard to analyze in my book I also talk about children the fact that
[Guest]: how much learning takes place invisibly and then it suddenly appears fully
[Guest]: formed these kinds of sudden leaps are hard to understand analyze they go
[Guest]: against our wish to see daily progress or daily decline so you'll find probably
[Guest]: less work being done on it you know how do you reach inside the black box of a
[Guest]: child's mind and find what do they know and they're not telling you you know so
[Guest]: I like the idea of what they call saltational change so jumping from one
[Guest]: state to another or you see it in the case of Hindi when I talked about
[Guest]: looking at the kind of Hindi you see in some of Amir Khusrow's duhas it could be
[Guest]: written today and people say well it would have to have been different
[Guest]: because it was so many hundred years ago no it doesn't have to be it's quite
[Guest]: possible that things were so stable in a fundamental way that except for little
[Guest]: details of some words getting added or lost Hindi has been fairly stable for
[Guest]: the last nine hundred two thousand years nice thought
[Amit Varma]: no fascinating thought to get back to the question of languages evolving you
[Amit Varma]: know suddenly within a generation you have a new language and you and you gave
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about the slave trade to the Caribbean leading to first pigeon
[Amit Varma]: languages and then Creole languages and so on so tell me a little bit about what
[Amit Varma]: that process was like because we all know the three-way trip right that you
[Amit Varma]: have ships going down West Africa you know picking up slaves and then you have
[Amit Varma]: them going back to the Caribbean and making that particular journey and then
[Amit Varma]: they go with sugar back to Europe to provide cheap calories to the you know
[Amit Varma]: new masses of labor out there but what's happening to these slaves is also
[Amit Varma]: fascinating that how do they learn to communicate not just with their new
[Amit Varma]: masters as it were but also with each other because it can be from different
[Amit Varma]: places how does that first generation learn to communicate and what does that
[Amit Varma]: what that then becomes and what this tells us because it seemed to me that
[Amit Varma]: this is what you describe happening here the new languages coming up through the
[Amit Varma]: slave trade what you describe happening here in a couple of generations is
[Amit Varma]: really an accelerated version of how languages do come into being with some
[Amit Varma]: differences obviously as you've pointed out but so tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: this about how you get to a pigeon language and then to a Creole language
[Guest]: okay I wish I could be as what shall I say unequivocal as I sound my thinking
[Guest]: has been changing over that over time and even as I've looked at India and
[Guest]: even as I've looked at the Caribbean too because every time I hear West African
[Guest]: speak I hear something that sounds totally familiar from the Caribbean the
[Guest]: normal story is that slaves were brought they couldn't communicate with each
[Guest]: other they had similar grammars to their languages and that they picked up in a
[Guest]: garbled form words from the master's house and that got on to the grammars
[Guest]: I don't buy that so much anymore I find it a little bit too much so much of a
[Guest]: coincidence that places in Ghana Nigeria and even other parts okay Liberia Sierra
[Guest]: Leone how does they fit in so neatly into the picture it's not just something
[Guest]: that happened on the boats something was either happening before because after
[Guest]: all the people who went to Sierra Leone and Liberia were basically Africans
[Guest]: freed from the high seas and brought back to Africa but to where so they have
[Guest]: this new land of refuge how is it that they sound so much like Caribbean's
[Guest]: they've never been to the Caribbean how do Nigerians when they talk I hear
[Guest]: something that could be Trinidadian and then I hear a name like Baba Tunde which
[Guest]: is Yoruba of course Yoruba is in it something bigger is happening and that's
[Guest]: when I started thinking that something similar could have happened in India
[Guest]: that this thing called the pigeon didn't happen in such a an atmosphere of chaos
[Guest]: there was a little bit of time and that time was probably taken on the West
[Guest]: African coast itself and that the this language existed it existed in the ships
[Guest]: you know and I mean if life should be long enough for me that's the next
[Guest]: thing I want to work on because these ships went to a large number of places
[Guest]: and you see this very African type of language which is also there in Africa
[Guest]: with people who never went left sounding similar so something more is going on
[Guest]: than just the disruption and chaos of a transportation and being on the other
[Guest]: side I'm not very certain that the words came so suddenly like there are a lot of
[Guest]: Portuguese words used in pigeon in West Africa and in parts of the Caribbean to
[Guest]: by Portuguese what are they doing there so obviously it's a very complex thing
[Guest]: to do with the setting up of slave factories the whole shipping industry I
[Guest]: want to study that next so unfortunately instead of giving you a simple answer
[Guest]: giving you a unfinished answer because I think there's a lot that we need to know
[Guest]: why is Hawaii so similar to the Caribbean that's a big question a
[Guest]: burning question so I suspect that it has to do not with the genetic code as
[Guest]: Derek Bickerton once said but we have to look at migration patterns that's that's
[Amit Varma]: fascinating and I'm I'm already while we're still talking about this book
[Amit Varma]: already looking forward to talking about the next book when it's done but for the
[Amit Varma]: sake of my listeners let me quickly kind of summarize the narrative that is in
[Amit Varma]: your book and why I find that so interesting and and after I finish you
[Amit Varma]: can you know add layers to it and add the kind of nuance that you've just been
[Amit Varma]: adding and it's a very fascinating narrative of how the slave trade speaks
[Amit Varma]: to these different languages that you have Africans thrown together on the
[Amit Varma]: boats and how do they communicate they pick up words from their masters and
[Amit Varma]: those words form a kind of pigeon language where you'll have these basic
[Amit Varma]: words like food toilet eat water whatever you have all these words but
[Amit Varma]: there's no structure to them and these are known as pigeon languages and then
[Amit Varma]: what happens in the next generation is that as their kids grow up and absorb
[Amit Varma]: these languages they put what you call sort of a substratum to it where they
[Amit Varma]: give a grammatical structure to it that is similar to the West African structure
[Amit Varma]: so when somebody you know this Creole English Creole French various Creole
[Amit Varma]: versions of all these languages but a Creole is not just a smattering of
[Amit Varma]: Jagaru words as pigeon is but it's actually a language with an architecture
[Amit Varma]: and an operating system of its own and while to the outside observer it might
[Amit Varma]: seem that hey these are words from English so is derived from English or
[Amit Varma]: these are words from French so is derived from French actually those are
[Amit Varma]: you know that's the surface topping and the base the basic architecture and so
[Amit Varma]: on is from their original languages which is really fascinating and and the
[Amit Varma]: journey of your book is then examining whether a lot of Indian languages have
[Amit Varma]: evolved in a similar way and not to give anything away but one of the conclusions
[Amit Varma]: you came to at least as I read it is that there wasn't necessarily that
[Amit Varma]: pigeon phase because there was no need to learn some you know words overnight
[Amit Varma]: that urgency wasn't there there wasn't that sense of chaos and the world thrown
[Amit Varma]: into turmoil you could evolve over decades and centuries so whereas that
[Amit Varma]: pigeon phase wasn't there the Creole ization is there where you take language
[Amit Varma]: where you take you know nouns and all of that from a particular source say
[Amit Varma]: Sanskrit for example normally Prakrit which itself came from Sanskrit which
[Amit Varma]: was like a vernacular form of Sanskrit as you point out and and and then you
[Amit Varma]: put that substructure which is possibly from the Dravidian languages going back
[Amit Varma]: to the Harappans and all of that so I found this explanation quite fascinating
[Amit Varma]: as you know an explanation of how languages can evolve in different ways
[Amit Varma]: where one something sudden happens and two something sudden doesn't really
[Amit Varma]: happen but it's the same kind of structure where you have an architecture
[Amit Varma]: and an operating system that is there from before and you're putting other
[Amit Varma]: things on top of it but what you seem to be saying now is that that early
[Amit Varma]: narrative of you know the slave trade leading to a pigeon ization leading to
[Amit Varma]: Creole languages coming up within a generation are you saying that that's a
[Amit Varma]: little too simplistic as well that there's more to that I feel so in fact I
[Guest]: when people say first came the pigeon and then came the Creoles and that
[Guest]: children brought the Creoles I guess I could put a very different storyline to
[Guest]: this the pigeons only existed as a makeshift thing to transfer the
[Guest]: vocabulary it was not necessary in India because there was time and vocabulary
[Guest]: was known in some manner of speaking but I never think of the pigeon as a very
[Guest]: important thing above and beyond handling the very first generation and
[Guest]: getting the first words across now it isn't that the children know we are told
[Guest]: that the children developed it into a proper full-fledged language full-fledged
[Guest]: operating system which coincidentally was exactly like the one that they had
[Guest]: before now just think of the logic of that we develop something absolutely new
[Guest]: out from scratch which was identical to what was there before what is your
[Guest]: normal reaction to that that in fact the thing from before never went away and
[Guest]: that it isn't a brand new thing and that it's just like the Indian situation a
[Guest]: coat of paint comes on top of an old operating system and as for why maybe
[Guest]: there was more chaos but I don't think there needs to have been a lot of chaos
[Guest]: in the Caribbean because from the way the slave trading was done there was one
[Guest]: phase when it was Ghana one phase when it was further up the coast towards the
[Guest]: very end it was Nigeria the Yorubas how can you say they don't understand each
[Guest]: other the coastal Ghanaians pretty much can understand each other so it isn't
[Guest]: that they couldn't but that perhaps they were already exposed to something that
[Guest]: was beginning to be spoken on the coast which involved English words and then on
[Guest]: the estates so this idea that they reinvented the African operating system
[Guest]: it just never went away you know so exactly as in India a coat of paint a
[Guest]: little more hastily was put over something very old it's a nice thought
[Guest]: because we tend to think only of our paternal line and that you know you say
[Guest]: that the North Indian languages are Indo-Aryan which means prakrit based not
[Guest]: actually Sanskrit based Sanskrit was sort of like the Mona Lisa on the wall
[Guest]: you don't take pieces of paint from the Mona Lisa to paint you can get paid
[Guest]: somewhere else the same colors are there that's prakrit but that this could
[Guest]: happen in India very slowly we think of these languages as we call them
[Guest]: Indo-Aryan but that's just one side because there's the other side that we
[Guest]: completely ignore and to me that's the exciting side maybe because we never
[Guest]: thought about it before that's something much older in India has been preserved
[Amit Varma]: that's that's fascinating and and we'll turn our attention to India next because
[Amit Varma]: like I was you know literally while reading your book I was actually making
[Amit Varma]: many of the sounds that you spoke about and yeah the tongue is hitting my teeth
[Amit Varma]: and yeah the tongue is hitting the top of my mouth and I never knew that only
[Amit Varma]: in South Asia do we do something like that and it was quite fascinating
[Amit Varma]: thinking about languages especially because a lot of your examples are from
[Amit Varma]: Hindi and Marathi two languages which I kind of know though I don't speak
[Amit Varma]: Marathi but I can understand it quite well and that was eye-opening for me but
[Amit Varma]: before we get there let's take a quick commercial break and then on the other
[Amit Varma]: side of the break we'll start talking about our languages and what they reveal
[Amit Varma]: about us long before I was a podcaster I was a writer in fact chances are that
[Amit Varma]: many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut which was active
[Amit Varma]: between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time I love the
[Amit Varma]: freedom the form gave me and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways I exercised
[Amit Varma]: my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different
[Amit Varma]: things because I wrote about many different things well that phase in my
[Amit Varma]: life ended for various reasons and now it is time to revive it only now I'm
[Amit Varma]: doing it through a newsletter I have started the India Uncut newsletter at
[Amit Varma]: indiancut.substack.com where I will write regularly about whatever catches
[Amit Varma]: my fancy I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about
[Amit Varma]: much else so please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe it
[Amit Varma]: is free once you sign up each new installment that I write will land up in
[Amit Varma]: your email inbox you don't need to go anywhere so subscribe now for free the
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com thank you
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene in the unseen I'm chatting with Peggy Mohan about her
[Amit Varma]: wonderful book Wanderers Kings Merchants from which I learned so much about not
[Amit Varma]: just language but about India and in a sense about humanity as well while we
[Amit Varma]: start talking about the way language evolved in India let's get really
[Amit Varma]: specific and one of the things that really struck me in your book and had me
[Amit Varma]: making different sounds which had surrounding people look at me wondering
[Amit Varma]: what the hell is happening is your section where you talk about the
[Amit Varma]: difference between dental and retroflex sounds where you know just to sort of
[Amit Varma]: demystify it for the reader you write at one point that quote Sanskrit has
[Amit Varma]: besides the consonants like TTH, DDH and THH, DHH, DHH, NHH that are produced with the
[Amit Varma]: tip of the tongue touching the upper teeth a parallel series of retroflex
[Amit Varma]: consonants produced with the tip of the tongue turned upwards THH, DHH, DHH so I
[Amit Varma]: hope I don't get any of that wrong and it's very interesting like you you talk
[Amit Varma]: about for example the words DAT and DANT right and DANT is the D and the THH in
[Amit Varma]: DANT when you make those sounds your teeth your tongue is touching the top
[Amit Varma]: of your teeth but when you say DANT which is to scold someone the D and the THH
[Amit Varma]: your tongue is curled back and that is what is called as a retroflex sound and
[Amit Varma]: you point out that nowhere in any of the Indo-Aryan languages do these retroflex
[Amit Varma]: sounds exist they exist only in South Asia as it were in fact at one point you
[Amit Varma]: say that you know gaining retroflex sounds is basically a sign of becoming
[Amit Varma]: South Asian so now when we say that Sanskrit is one of the Indo-Aryan
[Amit Varma]: languages and it came from there but the fact of the matter is that the Sanskrit
[Amit Varma]: that was you know first written down in the Rig Veda which is you know a subject
[Amit Varma]: we'll also come to but that was first written down had these retroflex sounds
[Amit Varma]: which none of its sort of forebears or ancestors or sister languages from
[Amit Varma]: Indo-Aryan had which means that there were already local influences kind of
[Amit Varma]: creeping in and and this is just one of the many sort of forensic lines of
[Amit Varma]: inquiry that you take to figure out what really happened so tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about that in fact tell me a little bit about your sense of discovering this
[Guest]: like I think you point to a 1974 paper by Madhav Deshpande who talks about the
[Guest]: Sanskrit in the Rig Veda. 1979 it got published yeah. 79 it got published. But in 76 he was
[Amit Varma]: talking about writing it. Ah okay okay so I must have got the date wrong apologies
[Amit Varma]: so tell me a bit about what is that moment of discovery like for you you
[Amit Varma]: know what are the implications of it the fact that you know people think of
[Amit Varma]: Sanskrit as this pure codified language in fact some people here will think of
[Amit Varma]: it as a mothership of all languages but and there are all these things people
[Amit Varma]: say about how it's a perfect computer language and all of that sort of the
[Amit Varma]: whatsapp forwards of the past as it were yeah absolutely but those are the myths
[Amit Varma]: around it but here you find that in a sense it was also evolving and living
[Amit Varma]: and breathing in a manner of speaking till again it rectified after it took a
[Amit Varma]: written form but tell me a bit about one your sort of sense of discovery and and
[Amit Varma]: what windows did this open for you and two what are the directions that a
[Amit Varma]: discovery like this can logically lead to like if you ask yourself the question
[Amit Varma]: why why are these retroflex sounds there what are the different competing
[Amit Varma]: theories that come up and what was your exploration of those like okay when I
[Guest]: started I was at a very different place from when I finished writing about all
[Guest]: of this that so I'll go backwards for you when I I had to draw the map of
[Guest]: India because I had to do my own drawings because the government of India
[Guest]: doesn't allow you to use maps in your book without permission so I drew my own
[Guest]: maps and they were linguistic maps and what came as a shock to me is that
[Guest]: almost all over South Asia all of Pakistan half of Nepal all of Sri Lanka
[Guest]: the Andamans all of the Indian mass except for the northeast and two little
[Guest]: areas two little tribes in the center of India all these areas have a distinction
[Guest]: between the third and may not have no and nowhere else really on earth there
[Guest]: may be places where you think you hear a da or a da but we're not very sure
[Guest]: whether it's important in the way it is in India so I discovered that India the
[Guest]: place that contains this M haplogroup as Tony Joseph would put it is the same
[Guest]: place that can contains all these retroflex sounds so it is almost like a
[Guest]: hallmark of a language being Indian. What Madhav Deshpande started with was
[Guest]: the certainty in his mind that original Sanskrit at the time that the Rig Veda
[Guest]: the main body of the Rig Veda was composed not written composed and
[Guest]: memorized did not have these sounds. Now what is interesting is that in the
[Guest]: Sanskrit story in the story of the Nambudris in Kerala in the story of the
[Guest]: Mughals and the Sultanate coming into India you always had people with one
[Guest]: high language okay Jews going into Kerala you also have that's another
[Guest]: migration always they preserve their sacred language but they speak something
[Guest]: else when they come and they throw that away very quickly so you find that all
[Guest]: people going into Kerala speak Malayalam as a regular thing but they preserve
[Guest]: their sacred language and similarly with Sanskrit we know very little about how
[Guest]: the people were actually speaking when they came. We try to reconstruct but if
[Guest]: we imagine that almost the first generation was a mixed generation you
[Guest]: start seeing that the Vedic children are already beginning to absorb a lot of
[Guest]: local influences because their mothers speak a different language so their
[Guest]: first language is probably by then not quite Sanskrit. So Sanskrit is kept
[Guest]: almost as a literary language and as a literary language it can remain retain
[Guest]: its older form. So what Professor Deshpande was basically saying is that
[Guest]: the earliest Rig Vedic verses did not have this but that over time since it
[Guest]: was memorized and recited it crept in and it's only when the Samhitas were
[Guest]: made about 700 years later that the people who actually sat and listened and
[Guest]: memorized and put together the Samhitas were already the sort of people who had
[Guest]: all these features in their colloquial speech and when they heard it here and
[Guest]: there in the Rig Veda they argued among themselves which word has a ta or which
[Guest]: word has a ta and they came to some kind of decision about it and the final
[Guest]: Sanskrit that was kept the Rig Vedic verses in the Samhitas contain
[Guest]: this feature but that wasn't there originally. So this was a big debate now
[Guest]: how could it have taken so long? Answer being well this is a document it's a
[Guest]: almost literary document the Mughals never brought it into Persian so why
[Guest]: would the original Vedic people have made an effort to bring it in but you
[Guest]: have this parallel strands of the colloquial form the Prakrit type
[Guest]: languages that they spoke and this very pristine Rig Veda which over time
[Guest]: started getting garbled here and there and so here is an interesting upshot of
[Guest]: it is that by the time it was ready to be used for practical purposes namely
[Guest]: for the Shrauta rituals to bring in Kshatriyas you began to find that it was
[Guest]: already a very different kind of a much more Indian language and and it all
[Guest]: links to all kinds of politics and it wasn't so needed earlier because it was
[Guest]: just verses written but then when it had a political purpose to solidify a new
[Guest]: empire the thing was put together and it acquired or it was formally given a
[Guest]: more Indian form but see Sanskrit was not written down and even to this day
[Guest]: most of the people who traditionally work with the Vedas or work with any of
[Guest]: the Sanskrit texts use memorization so there's much more scope to see things
[Guest]: slip in and then they make sense to you that they should be there and it didn't
[Guest]: end there because the very first word you could say of the Rig Veda has an
[Guest]: extra sound which is there in Marathi and Malayalam which is not in Sanskrit
[Guest]: but it's there in the first verse so the change is something that's ongoing it
[Amit Varma]: happened later. So let's let's take a step back and one of the things I want
[Amit Varma]: to take a step back and talk about is how the Arya came into India in the
[Amit Varma]: first place and something that you point out which people may not you know realize
[Amit Varma]: until it is pointed out is that most of the initial migrants were men that these
[Amit Varma]: were men who were coming in and what typically would happen is that they
[Amit Varma]: would get together with local women as it were to use a euphemism or and and
[Amit Varma]: often that could happen through violence where you know they get rid of local men
[Amit Varma]: and they take the local women and all of that but regardless of how exactly what
[Amit Varma]: the methodology is happening they supplant the local men they become you
[Amit Varma]: know and they're coming on horseback and all of that so they are just stronger
[Amit Varma]: and they're like a superior class of people coming in and sort of taking over
[Amit Varma]: a land and what then happens and violent yeah so they are coming in with their
[Amit Varma]: language which one assumes is what you call the Ur Rig Vedic Sanskrit we don't
[Amit Varma]: know what that is like but that is like some pure thing that is out there and
[Amit Varma]: when they get here the language that they use in their everyday lives is
[Amit Varma]: Prakrit as you say which is not exactly a Creole it's not comparable to any of
[Guest]: the it's like Indian English it's like good Babu English yeah it's correct but
[Amit Varma]: it has a strong accent yeah so it's not a new language of its own it's just a
[Amit Varma]: kind of a variation of Sanskrit as it were and not taking anything from too
[Amit Varma]: many local influences but the women speak a different language and this is a
[Amit Varma]: point that you make that the women speak a different language in fact I think at
[Amit Varma]: you know one point you talk about Vyasa and you point out how when you look at
[Amit Varma]: sort of Vyasa's parentage his father grandfather and all that all of them are
[Amit Varma]: Arya but mother grandmother all of those are not so you have these different
[Amit Varma]: influences where the women are speaking one language and the men are speaking
[Amit Varma]: another language and what you would expect to happen over time and you know
[Amit Varma]: what you pointed out the whole Caribbean process was something becoming
[Amit Varma]: creolized is that the language of the woman the substructure that it has the
[Amit Varma]: operating system as it were takes in the words from the language of the men and
[Amit Varma]: it all kind of starts blending together and it's also interesting that there are
[Amit Varma]: you know some things about the early Rig Veda that kind of seem to make sense in
[Amit Varma]: the light of this process for example you talk about in your book how early on
[Amit Varma]: in the Rig Veda you quote Madhav Deshpande saying quote the attitude of
[Amit Varma]: the Vedic Aryans towards the non Aryans are seen in the Rig Veda is also very
[Amit Varma]: significant the general attitude is characterized by a strong hatred towards
[Amit Varma]: the non Aryans whether they are Spani Sabaras or Dasas very rarely are there
[Amit Varma]: any references to them as friends stop quote and you also talk about how they
[Amit Varma]: distrust of women at one point saying that beware of the women they can be
[Amit Varma]: like hyenas which on the one hand is sexist and misogynist but on the other
[Amit Varma]: hand would be natural caution given that perhaps those women are there because
[Amit Varma]: they got rid of all their men to begin with and there's an element of coercion
[Amit Varma]: to all of this and then you talk about how the Rig Veda sort of is something
[Amit Varma]: that is not written down to begin with and the reason we don't quite know what
[Amit Varma]: the Sanskrit of that time when these men came on horseback is like is that it was
[Amit Varma]: not written down and therefore it did not become ossified so the Rig Veda
[Amit Varma]: becomes this oral tradition which carries on through the centuries which
[Amit Varma]: you know different shakhas or clans kind of remember in their own tradition and
[Amit Varma]: then it mixes with the local language and those kind of habits come in like
[Amit Varma]: retroflex sounds I presume and then by the time is written down these
[Amit Varma]: variations make their way into what is written down and once it is written down
[Amit Varma]: of course it becomes ossified because nobody really speaks it in their
[Amit Varma]: everyday language and it becomes ossified and it is there as it is and
[Amit Varma]: that's kind of the process is this an accurate summation or have I left out
[Guest]: something important I don't think you've really left anything out no by the time
[Guest]: the Samhitas were there you think of the Sanskrit as the Mona Lisa it's a
[Guest]: completed work and soon after this the kind of people who worked in Sanskrit or
[Guest]: even by then was speaking something else in their daily lives so Sanskrit had
[Guest]: become sort of like a literary language though not written down yeah I think
[Amit Varma]: you're pretty accurate on that yeah and tell me about what eggs what we know
[Amit Varma]: about the languages that existed before that like one of the things that we do
[Amit Varma]: know and which you have kind of pointed out in your book is that the Harappan
[Amit Varma]: people were way more advanced and the Vedic people in many ways like you talk
[Amit Varma]: about court the Harappan people had intelligently planned cities blow up
[Amit Varma]: agriculture central granaries craft production and advanced system of civic
[Amit Varma]: drainage homes with indoor plumbing the Vedic people were pre-urban and
[Amit Varma]: essentially pastoral stop quote you know and of course we haven't kind of
[Amit Varma]: deciphered the Harappan language yet but there is enough reason to believe and
[Amit Varma]: Tony also talks about this that all the Dravidian languages kind of come from
[Amit Varma]: there we're guessing partly yeah we're guessing so tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: what we can guess about or what we know about the language landscape before the
[Amit Varma]: Arya come riding in with their Sanskrit and you know and their alpha male
[Guest]: attitude okay well first thing is that the only people who tend to bring women
[Guest]: on migrations are hunter-gatherers so once you get past that you're really
[Guest]: talking of explorers explorer is actually a good word to use because you
[Guest]: don't get into the sense of contentious words like invader or so these were
[Guest]: definitely violent people the general feeling is that the Harappans
[Guest]: civilization crumbled shortly before the Arya came there was no conflict where
[Guest]: one defeated the other or invaded they came into a land which had space for
[Guest]: them but they were pretty violent people as to what their languages sound like we
[Guest]: can either say we draw a complete blank because we cannot decode the in the
[Guest]: script I don't know if it's a script there are linguists like Witzel who say
[Guest]: he doesn't think so I'm not sure I agree with him because I think that something
[Guest]: like seals or a language of what we what my instincts tell me about this language
[Guest]: is really full of nouns so there's no reason why you should be looking for a
[Guest]: sentence structure in the seals these are probably labels and probably nouns
[Guest]: however what do we know about the language very very little I mean here
[Guest]: and there you might find a word used in Sumerian or something which refers to
[Guest]: this place but my way of looking back at it is a more subtractive way what is
[Guest]: there in all the languages west of Banaras because once you go east of
[Guest]: Banaras it's a different family west of Banaras all the way across Pakistan and
[Guest]: all the way south down to Goa that cannot be explained by Sanskrit and
[Guest]: perhaps also cannot be explained by anything Dravidian or otherwise tribal
[Guest]: in India and when you start finding those features then you start getting
[Guest]: what I think of as a glimpse of the people who were there before and then
[Guest]: the question is who were the people who were there before the Harappans or their
[Guest]: relatives it's very unlikely that all the peoples living around the Harappan
[Guest]: area who were not directly in the citadel would be vastly different in
[Guest]: terms of language but and the way this one particular feature the past tense
[Guest]: being food eaten rather than I ate khanakaya not as in Bhojpuri would say
[Guest]: hum Kylie you know or Bengali would have a very different way of Sanskrit later
[Guest]: Sanskrit actually began to incorporate this but you begin to get a sense of
[Guest]: something that is in the mindset a language which is heavily full of nouns
[Guest]: does not like finite verbs avoids them here and there treats verbs as something
[Guest]: that can have a gender you know there are other things in Hindi and all the
[Guest]: languages of India which are not in Sanskrit like the difference between
[Guest]: hogia and Hua that's not in Sanskrit there's no way to express that in
[Guest]: Sanskrit that's older and it's definitely something that was there
[Guest]: otherwise why would it be in modern Indian language but it's all over India
[Guest]: that's one that's different from the strange past tenses which are only in
[Guest]: the area fed by the Harappan family so okay what else do we know about the
[Guest]: Harappan people if you look at Punjabi Sindhi Baluchi Pashto you get languages
[Guest]: which are very similar to the Dravidian ones in the avoidance of Bhadhaja
[Guest]: you in Punjabi if you wanted to say Ghar it becomes Khar and it is a Khar with a
[Guest]: tone Sindhi uses they would instead of saying Dha becomes Dha and Dha becomes Dha
[Guest]: so they're different but they're not different because of this H thing that
[Guest]: you get in Bhadhaja they basically are avoiding the same sounds that are
[Guest]: uncomfortable for South Indians and nobody's really said it in this way that
[Guest]: this is a Dravidian type feature because it's not there in the Northeast I mean
[Guest]: Hindi, Bengali, Oriya, Assamese are comfortable with these sounds but this
[Guest]: particular area is not so these are little glimpses you have of what could
[Guest]: be features of the old languages so we can't even say what the words are and if
[Amit Varma]: we are to for a moment get a little more meta like you're talking about I mean
[Amit Varma]: these are of course aspirated sounds the Dha, Khar, Ghar which as you've pointed out
[Amit Varma]: that is something that this Dravidian belt seems to avoid but it does exist
[Amit Varma]: somewhere else and some people are comfortable with it and some people are
[Amit Varma]: not or even when we look at you know the sort of the retroflex sounds which some
[Amit Varma]: people are comfortable with or some people are not you know as as half
[Amit Varma]: Bengali and I grew up speaking Bengali at home I sometimes get mocked because
[Amit Varma]: in Hindi I can't say that as it you know I can say but not the I don't even know
[Guest]: if I'm saying it properly now no I had the same problem for on until I lived in
[Guest]: Delhi for a while I I know and that's that's something that blew my mind I
[Guest]: couldn't do it as a kid I tried yeah because we don't we didn't have it
[Guest]: anymore we lost it in Bhojpuri in Trinidad so here's my question you know
[Amit Varma]: and maybe this is too meta to really be able to answer but why do these evolve
[Amit Varma]: like this or why do some languages evolve in a sense that retroflex sounds
[Amit Varma]: are natural and you're using them and what you know and aspirated sounds come
[Amit Varma]: easy to you and in some other languages some other people like if you've grown
[Amit Varma]: up speaking Punjabi for example you simply won't say her you can't say her
[Amit Varma]: you'll just say car it's just with that tone and that inflection so is there a
[Amit Varma]: deeper meta why behind that that why do some languages have some sounds which
[Amit Varma]: other languages don't why should a sound evolve in a particular particular way
[Amit Varma]: and you know why should some people have this practice of it hitting their tongue
[Amit Varma]: at the top of their mouth you know or in some places like you've pointed out in
[Amit Varma]: your book people won't mix vowels you know either it comes from the front of
[Amit Varma]: the mouth or the back of the throat and they won't mix them that's Turkish yeah
[Amit Varma]: the Turkic languages yeah the Turkic languages so is there a deeper why
[Guest]: behind that I can't actually say that why does why does this happen but I can
[Guest]: give an idea that it goes all the way back to initial conditions and initial
[Guest]: conditions are who were the original people in the mix who were the mothers
[Guest]: or the substratum layer in the mix that's the layer we never think about up
[Guest]: to now and that's probably where your answers come what was comfortable for
[Guest]: them in terms of what they spoke before clearly as you know that there are
[Guest]: certain sounds Bengalis are not very happy with but at the same time they
[Guest]: extremely happy with aspirated sounds Bhadha, Jha is just super easy for
[Guest]: Bengalis why I can't tell you except it does give you an idea of the boundaries
[Guest]: of larger groups that the entire Magadhan area we call it Magadhan now
[Guest]: maybe it had another name or maybe it had no name or maybe it goes back to the
[Guest]: time of quite a separate civilization from the Indus Valley one which got its
[Guest]: input from Southeast Asia rather than from the Eurasian steps so you have this
[Guest]: Southeast Asian component coming in as to why that mix to create something like
[Guest]: Bengali there are too many steps there I can't trace as to there are a lot of
[Guest]: unknowns but except to say that there is a family of languages in the east which
[Guest]: includes Assamese, Odia, Bengali and the Bihari dialects into UP and that there's
[Guest]: almost like a tectonic plate that is in collision between that area and the area
[Guest]: to the west where there's gender there's funny past tenses there's and which
[Guest]: seems to coincide with the people who were there before the Vedic people came
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to continue digressing and ask you another meta question because it's
[Amit Varma]: on a subject that you know interests me a lot which is I discovered this term in
[Amit Varma]: your book called ergativity yeah which is there in a bunch of Indian languages
[Amit Varma]: where I'll quickly quote you ergativity is a tricky thing to explain because it
[Amit Varma]: involves subjects and objects exchanging places when the sentence goes into the
[Amit Varma]: past tense not I did not work but by me work done stop code and you give various
[Amit Varma]: examples and an example of this of course is that you know you could say
[Amit Varma]: that Mac Hathi who or you could say khana khaya and khana khaya is of course the
[Amit Varma]: other way around now I teach an online writing course which is of course on
[Amit Varma]: writing in English where I will often tell my students why you should always
[Amit Varma]: use the active voice so you should have a construction which is subject plus
[Amit Varma]: verb plus whatever and and the reason for it flows to how readers will process
[Amit Varma]: language and comprehend language which is that you want them to move forward
[Amit Varma]: all the time so if it is active voice they're always moving forward so when
[Amit Varma]: you say Peggy enlightened Amit the reader hears Peggy they are like okay
[Amit Varma]: what about Peggy Peggy enlightened okay who did she enlightened and then you go
[Amit Varma]: on whereas if you were to have it backwards if you were to do it in
[Amit Varma]: passive voice that Amit was enlightened by Peggy then there's that moment where
[Amit Varma]: the reader is kind of going backwards and it's just an unnatural structure now
[Amit Varma]: this is something that is very standard and almost cliched writing advice that
[Amit Varma]: use active voice you'd use subject plus verb go forwards and it's interesting
[Amit Varma]: that there are exceptions to it that occur naturally for example Steven
[Amit Varma]: Pinker gave a great speech where he made the same exhortation that please use
[Amit Varma]: active voice but then he pointed out why people sometimes use passive voice in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that if I end a sentence with the emphasis on something I might begin
[Amit Varma]: the next sentence talk you know with that and that can make it passive but
[Amit Varma]: even if that the passive voice comes naturally ideally one sticks to active
[Amit Varma]: for the very good reason that you want the reader moving forward now one thing
[Amit Varma]: that I keep pointing out and it amuses me is that in a bunch of Indian languages
[Amit Varma]: including Marathi and Urdu and there are specific reasons I use these two
[Amit Varma]: examples comes from what follows that the passive formulation is quite common
[Amit Varma]: so for example in cricket commentary you'll often have Sanjay Manjrekar whose
[Amit Varma]: native tongue is Marathi or a Ramiz Raja whose native tongue is Urdu saying
[Amit Varma]: things like beautiful cover drive was played by Sourav Ganguly right which I
[Amit Varma]: think of it as speaking backwards and it just makes a listener work harder to
[Amit Varma]: process what is happening now my question is this that why does
[Amit Varma]: aggativity even exist then whatever spoken language evolves evolves for a
[Amit Varma]: reason because it is optimal to speak in a particular way which is why you have
[Amit Varma]: for example iambic pentameter being such an effective form in English because 10
[Amit Varma]: syllables is about the you know what we can say naturally without needing to
[Amit Varma]: take a breath so that's a form of the language which is dictated by physiology
[Amit Varma]: as it were what is your lung capacity so this is something I can't figure out
[Amit Varma]: that why do we speak backwards as it were or use these passive formulations
[Amit Varma]: in some of these languages again I know that it's like a question that might be
[Guest]: too meta and no one can really know well let's see I'll answer you first by
[Guest]: saying why is a very difficult thing to say except that we know that Marathi is
[Guest]: one end of this of the continuum and into Pakistan Urdu all the languages of
[Guest]: Pakistan contain this feature it's not exactly passive it's something a little
[Guest]: different because we are cautioned not to call it passive because there is a
[Guest]: passive in all these languages is a little bit different but at the same
[Guest]: time the example I use is that if you are the sort of language which prefers
[Guest]: to use what's called participles eaten instead of ate or done instead of did
[Guest]: you were going to find that it's going to have a passive form to it you know
[Guest]: the eaten food it's not I'm not the one who's eaten the food is what's eaten
[Guest]: so in a way this structure if you favor saying eaten instead of ate you're
[Guest]: forced into a somewhat passive type formulation and then the person who does
[Guest]: it it's by him food eaten by him it seems to be something that goes all the
[Guest]: way into at sometimes southern Iran it's lost its vanish from modern Farsi but
[Guest]: this you see it in the Ashokan pillars you see it in Kali Dasa you see it with
[Guest]: exactly the same thing in these languages it ends in the even in Urdu
[Guest]: the word rehta is the same en ending eaten broken thrown you know these
[Guest]: languages liked to imagine the past in those terms only when there could be an
[Guest]: object you couldn't gone you I gone obviously this kind of thing can't
[Guest]: happen there's no object so the answer the simplest answer is that it's an area
[Guest]: phenomenon and the deeper answer is that the very nature of a past participle is
[Guest]: this going to be passive I don't know about Bengali but I know in Bhojpuri
[Guest]: when we use those past participles we do something to make them unpassive yet
[Guest]: like you want to say you don't say he has done it
[Guest]: you have to take out the passiveness from it it's not he was not
[Guest]: done he has not done so you could do this in Bhojpuri and I imagine in
[Guest]: Bengali and all these other languages too whereas you stuck in the whole
[Guest]: Western belt that you prefer a past which by its very nature has a passive
[Guest]: flavor to it and that's the way they have imagined the past and it leaked
[Guest]: into Sanskrit so by the time of Kalidasa by the time of the Ashokan
[Guest]: pillars you're seeing this sort of thing all over the place and there are people
[Guest]: who know Sanskrit very well and have read a lot of modern more modern
[Guest]: literature who think it's perfectly good Sanskrit it's just like it's perfectly
[Guest]: good Indian English to throw in passives everywhere it's the same sort of thing
[Guest]: it's not wrong but it's a little awkward but it begins to be acceptable but it
[Guest]: comes from underlying conditions I'm very certain it's because of the people
[Guest]: who were there before and the way their grammars in their original languages
[Guest]: worked
[Amit Varma]: yeah and and to be clear I wasn't necessarily passing a value judgment
[Amit Varma]: like I am not at all one of those language snobs who thinks that you know
[Amit Varma]: there is a purity to a certain form of expression and anything else is bad so
[Amit Varma]: you know language evolves it's a living breathing thing and that's what it is as
[Amit Varma]: as in fact your book demonstrates more than any other but I was kind of curious
[Amit Varma]: and I guess some things you know a certain kind of way of using a
[Amit Varma]: participle could evolve as sort of just an evolutionary accident and then it
[Amit Varma]: determines other things like the passive voice which flows from there and there
[Amit Varma]: isn't necessarily deeper structure to that a deeper purpose to that particular
[Amit Varma]: thing let's kind of go back for a moment to the Vedic invasion I was reading a
[Amit Varma]: passage that you quoted from Jared Diamond in fact in gun germs and steel
[Amit Varma]: which you quote in your book and a question struck me after reading that so
[Amit Varma]: first I'll sort of read that out and then I'll ask my question where he's
[Amit Varma]: talking about what happens when a technologically more advanced group
[Amit Varma]: enters a new territory as would be the case with the area on their horses and
[Amit Varma]: he writes quote where the population densities are very low as as usual in
[Amit Varma]: regions occupied by hunter-gatherer bands survivors of a defeated group need
[Amit Varma]: only move farther away from their enemies where population densities are
[Amit Varma]: moderate as in regions occupied by food producing tribes no large vacant areas
[Amit Varma]: remain to which survivors of a defeated band can flee do the victors have no use
[Amit Varma]: for survivors of a defeated tribe unless to take the women in marriage the
[Amit Varma]: defeated men are killed and their territory may be occupied by the victors
[Amit Varma]: alternatively because many such societies have intensive food production
[Amit Varma]: systems capable of yielding large surpluses the victors can leave the
[Amit Varma]: defeated in place but deprive them of political autonomy like turning them
[Amit Varma]: into slaves or assigning them place at the bottom of a caste system that last
[Amit Varma]: line is your comment after his quote ends and it kind of struck me that that
[Amit Varma]: this also shows that events that happened thousands of years ago
[Amit Varma]: literally can lead to a structure that is pervasive to this day that affects
[Amit Varma]: how we live our lives today number one like Tony in his book for example though
[Amit Varma]: his timeline is slightly different talks about how essentially all of these
[Amit Varma]: people who migrated to India from West Asia or the area were basically
[Amit Varma]: intermingling freely till about you know the common era started and then for the
[Amit Varma]: last 2,000 years has been strict endogamy because a particular vision of
[Amit Varma]: society which is the Brahmanical vision of a caste system has kind of won out
[Amit Varma]: now one this seems pretty incontrovertible that this is kind of how
[Amit Varma]: it's happened but I'm more keen on the role that language plays in this because
[Amit Varma]: in language almost seems to play a role in perpetuating these for example
[Amit Varma]: Sanskrit was denied to women at one point women weren't allowed to learn it
[Amit Varma]: it was something that was there for the Brahmans you know and and they would
[Amit Varma]: learn the Vedas by heart and so on and so forth and equally in modern day times
[Amit Varma]: where we've been invaded at different times by different people and in modern
[Amit Varma]: day times it seems that English has now become that marker of class which also
[Amit Varma]: you have a wonderful chapter on where you speak about that and in fact it's
[Amit Varma]: it's something I bemoan because English being you know in our postcolonial times
[Amit Varma]: English has become a marker of class and it's almost become a signaling device
[Amit Varma]: for people to show their sophistication by speaking in fancy English which means
[Amit Varma]: that a lot of the language that we use contains you know these old archaic
[Amit Varma]: British pomposities which the British themselves have discarded but we will
[Amit Varma]: still kind of use language like that like instead of saying stop we'll use a
[Amit Varma]: phrase like put an end to you know and so on which is disrespectful of whoever's
[Amit Varma]: reading you or listening to you if you use that kind of language I was shocked
[Amit Varma]: once to discover on YouTube that there are actually these really popular videos
[Amit Varma]: supposedly teaching better English to Indians and what they are really saying
[Amit Varma]: is don't use simple words always use a more complex word so instead of say use
[Amit Varma]: the word articulate which is exactly the opposite of the advice I'd give where
[Amit Varma]: the language becomes a signaling device where the language becomes a marker of
[Amit Varma]: class a marker of social status and so on so how does this affect everything
[Amit Varma]: that is happening in sort of a subterranean sense where languages are
[Amit Varma]: changing even Sanskrit is getting retroflex and all of that from the
[Amit Varma]: language of the conquered people as it were and in later times under the
[Amit Varma]: Mughals you have sort of you know all the kichris that are popping up
[Amit Varma]: including Hindi slash Urdu how does language play a part in this and what
[Amit Varma]: are your sort of observations of language and and these sort of social
[Guest]: structures that are around us I wouldn't say that language does it I would say
[Guest]: language reflects it because basically this is something that's happened again
[Guest]: and again in India at the simplest level I could say once upon a time certain
[Guest]: people spoke Sanskrit and others didn't women didn't once upon a time certain
[Guest]: people spoke Persian and everyone else spoke other things the word would do
[Guest]: didn't wasn't used yet it was just basically Hindi and now certain people
[Guest]: speak English and others are kept away from it it's basically about a society
[Guest]: that has a tolerance of inequality and a perception that the elite can exist with
[Guest]: a code that's completely different from what other people speak so it's
[Guest]: something that's just been continuing so it isn't that Hindi has done it or
[Guest]: English has done it they merely have been selected to represent a way of
[Guest]: expressing inequality and hierarchy in fact in the book I even found that to
[Guest]: this day we have among say families in Punjab and Haryana you could see
[Guest]: Manmohan Singh you could see that his the minute the teleprompter is in Urdu
[Guest]: he becomes an orator and the minute he's reading Devanagari he's uncomfortable
[Guest]: he's just struggling to read the words he didn't grow up with it but his wife
[Guest]: would have grown up with Gurmukhi or Devanagari and that that part of India
[Guest]: Haryana Punjab and maybe even parts of UP you'll find that men were brought up
[Guest]: with proudly saying that I studied Persian I can read Urdu but I just don't
[Guest]: know this Hindi thing and their wives are very different and you'd even find
[Guest]: it going further into the families that the men are non-veg the women are veg
[Guest]: the men like ghazals the women like bhajans this kind of thing is about a
[Guest]: fragmentation in so many ways that language is not responsible for it
[Guest]: except it captures it so very well it's so easy to tell who is who using
[Guest]: language instead of having to show papers and things like that so as long
[Guest]: as India has this perception that the elites need to be kept apart and
[Guest]: privileged by having a code that will guarantee that they and only they can
[Guest]: access the best jobs this kind of thing is going to happen I think it's sad
[Guest]: because it's going to mean that all the local languages are in danger because
[Guest]: poor people are not stupid they understand that English is what is going
[Guest]: to give the goodies to everyone and they're willing to see their languages
[Guest]: decline or they haven't given it a thought if their kids can have what we
[Guest]: have I think that's particularly fair thing to think if we had earlier on
[Guest]: found some other route of maybe very decentralized education up to a certain
[Guest]: point and so on our languages might have survived better but for that what would
[Guest]: have happened is our kids would have been mixing with poor kids and that was
[Guest]: something that the elite didn't want
[Amit Varma]: so here's my sort of next broader question one of the themes that kind of
[Amit Varma]: comes through your book is this jostling between languages where some languages
[Amit Varma]: evolve and then gain prominence and you know one classic example being Hindi
[Amit Varma]: gaining prominence while other languages like I grew up thinking that for example
[Amit Varma]: Bhojpuri and Avadhi and whatever are dialects of Hindi and later on you get
[Amit Varma]: to realize they're not dialects of Hindi they're completely separate languages
[Amit Varma]: which have you know with their own rich history and literature and all of that
[Amit Varma]: and somehow one kind of becomes prominent now there is a process which
[Amit Varma]: you know one can see in your book one can see through history that smaller
[Amit Varma]: languages gradually die out and get absorbed in bigger languages and this
[Amit Varma]: can happen in two ways one way of course is it can just happen through either
[Amit Varma]: through conquest or one social class becoming dominant in a particular place
[Amit Varma]: like you know after this we'll talk about you know Kerala and the Nambudiri
[Amit Varma]: Brahmins and how they along with the Nairs kind of they had a lucky victory
[Amit Varma]: in conquest and after that their language and whatever kind of takes over
[Amit Varma]: and that that shapes Malayalam so one way can be through that sort of social
[Amit Varma]: dominance whether by coercion or not but the other way is simply through
[Amit Varma]: following incentives like today if you're a young kid who's brought up say
[Amit Varma]: in a family in rural Maharashtra and you're speaking a particular kind of
[Amit Varma]: rich dialect of Marathi with its own history and like you said like you've
[Amit Varma]: pointed out Marathi is like a Creole language which has taken from Sanskrit
[Amit Varma]: from Dravidian from all over it's not just a simple case that it's a you know
[Amit Varma]: a child of Sanskrit there's much more that has gone into it each of these so
[Amit Varma]: called dialects will also be so rich but the incentive for this kid in
[Amit Varma]: Maharashtra is not necessarily to go deeper into his own language but into
[Amit Varma]: this language he's born into but to number one learn English and number two
[Amit Varma]: even if he's you know if he's moving to a big city and he's communicating in
[Amit Varma]: Marathi with fellow Maharashtrians to then learn and adopt the kind of
[Amit Varma]: standardized Marathi which everybody else speaks which then you know he or
[Amit Varma]: she will teach to their own children and in this way you have a sort of a
[Amit Varma]: consolidation happening where bigger languages take over and people move
[Amit Varma]: from smaller languages to bigger languages and then the smaller languages
[Amit Varma]: die and part of that is through sort of conquest and coercion and all of that
[Amit Varma]: which is a problem but part of it is through people may just making rational
[Amit Varma]: choices and following incentives and saying this is what I got to do to get
[Amit Varma]: ahead and it's hard to fault those individuals for making those choices so
[Amit Varma]: you know how do you sort of think about all of this and do you think this
[Amit Varma]: process is inevitable because I think whatever value judgment we pass on the
[Amit Varma]: process that hey diversity is good and we need it and so on do you think that
[Amit Varma]: it is simply inevitable and we can't do anything about it like just to take
[Amit Varma]: another digression I did an episode with Vikram doctor once on Indian food and
[Amit Varma]: how rich it is and how so much of it has actually come from outside and he
[Amit Varma]: pointed out what has happened to Indian bananas which is basically there was
[Amit Varma]: something called you know we imported a certain kind of banana outside and that
[Amit Varma]: became popular elsewhere as the Cavendish banana and then that got
[Amit Varma]: brought back to India and then the Cavendish banana just spread like
[Amit Varma]: wildfire because economies of scale and all that kicked in and then it kicked
[Amit Varma]: out a whole bunch of these indigenous bananas which otherwise existed and
[Amit Varma]: therefore now we have now we have the fact that one stand of bananas which we
[Amit Varma]: only exported is now killing all the other bananas we have not because it's
[Amit Varma]: necessarily a better banana as it were if they can be anything such as a better
[Amit Varma]: banana but simply because you know economies of scale and all those other
[Amit Varma]: factors have kicked in and you're losing that diversity so in the context of
[Amit Varma]: language is it inevitable that we lose that diversity see this all is slightly
[Guest]: again well like the banana one thing I must say I don't like it either but it
[Guest]: has shelf life so you'll find that when it comes to fruits shelf life becomes a
[Guest]: important thing when distance between the farm and the final consumer is so
[Guest]: much so you're talking about this huge size of the economy that now surrounds
[Guest]: us what makes a language do well you said conquest but that was earlier now
[Guest]: it's very simple that the language why did why did Hindi survive and older or
[Guest]: more pedigreed illustrious literary languages like brudge of a tea not do so
[Guest]: well it's very simple location Hindi came up in Delhi and Delhi was in all
[Guest]: sorts of ways a capital even from the time of the Sultanate so which variety
[Guest]: of Marathi is going to prevail the one that is around the Bombay area so cities
[Guest]: are very very implicated in the choice of which language is going to survive
[Guest]: and that also has to do with the fact that being a mega economy and we are
[Guest]: trying more and more to force a kind of convergence because anybody who's left
[Guest]: out of the communication loop is out of your control so you want more control of
[Guest]: people you want them to speak the language even if the elite may not want
[Guest]: the poor to speak English the internet world does so you're suddenly finding
[Guest]: people pulled in into an ethos that is not because of language but it's
[Guest]: definitely reflected in language so we are becoming more and more a global
[Guest]: community and not necessarily in a very great way it's nice that we can speak to
[Guest]: just about anyone anywhere but I don't think it is people's choice that is
[Guest]: making them do it if there were any other way I don't think people would put
[Guest]: their children in English medium schools and have them staring out the window
[Guest]: yawning dead silent for years in class it's not something that they would
[Guest]: regard as pleasant experience for the child but they don't have control over
[Guest]: the way in which the economy is running and the fact that we are getting more
[Guest]: and more interconnected networked so that is what has this impact now which
[Guest]: language our language will be chosen which one will be chosen the one that's
[Guest]: most associated with the large cities so that's the way it goes it's really not
[Amit Varma]: linguistic actually yeah it's kind of poignant I have a friend who writes in
[Amit Varma]: Kannada and wants to be a Kannada writer and he feels most comfortable in a
[Amit Varma]: dialect of Kannada that a lot of Kannada speak speakers won't even recognize
[Amit Varma]: that very few people speak in and he is like what should I do because if I write
[Amit Varma]: in that I will naturally have less readers less chance of getting published
[Amit Varma]: less whatever and I don't know what to say because the heart says that write in
[Amit Varma]: what you know best but the head says that you know you also want to put food
[Amit Varma]: in it you want to be read I would just say you know picking off on some phrase
[Amit Varma]: that you use that even if the elite don't want the poor to learn English I
[Amit Varma]: don't think that would be the case I think the elites on the contrary would
[Amit Varma]: want the poor to learn English because it increases their sort of networks like
[Amit Varma]: in a similar way that Macaulay wanted us to learn English so that they could be
[Amit Varma]: of course Macaulay's reasons were exploitative and very zero-sum but I
[Amit Varma]: think you know within India the more people that know English the more the
[Amit Varma]: markets are more the chances for prosperity because that is what English
[Guest]: does there's a problem which is if my child is brilliant it really does not
[Guest]: matter who competes with my child my child will do well but if my child is a
[Guest]: very ordinary mediocre child I need something that is yes and if you put
[Guest]: something as a gatekeeper like a language which my child has which is not
[Guest]: a sign of greater intellect but it can be posed as a important attribute of
[Guest]: some of or requirement for a job my child will always do better than a brilliant
[Guest]: child who doesn't have this language doing it's the ultimate reservation
[Guest]: system of the elite for the kids they have who probably could not compete in a
[Amit Varma]: fair fight I guess it comes down to whether you have a zero-sum mindset or a
[Amit Varma]: positive some mindset and a lot of Indians sadly do seem to be stuck in the
[Amit Varma]: zero-sum mindset but that said I think you know English has become such an
[Amit Varma]: aspirational language in India that you and and you of course also point out in
[Amit Varma]: your chapter on English how you know English has become so pervasive that
[Amit Varma]: even people who think that they speak only in Hindi actually don't that they
[Amit Varma]: are using a lot of English words and and I would argue that's not necessarily a
[Amit Varma]: bad thing those English words have just become part of the language it you know
[Amit Varma]: it's an Indian language but do you bemoan it because of the danger that some
[Amit Varma]: languages may die because of this because the English ization of
[Amit Varma]: everything or you know because on the whole language is evolving in this way
[Amit Varma]: is just the way history goes and it's not necessarily something bad see again
[Guest]: it's not about language it's about political choices economic choices if we
[Guest]: live in a world that's more controlled by the tech world of Silicon Valley or
[Guest]: global enterprises you're going to find a wish for streamlining into a single
[Guest]: language so I don't sit and worry about languages dying because people will
[Guest]: survive but I think that the entire idea of having a single language for such an
[Guest]: enormous community as the global community is flawed and I'm I'm not very
[Guest]: convinced that what we're doing in terms of the way the world is moving is the
[Guest]: right one or it's even in our control anymore so so these are very political
[Guest]: things I'm saying or political or socio-economic but they're not linguistic
[Guest]: language follows from this so to preserve languages you can't preserve a
[Guest]: language that you don't really use as long as you don't get your medical
[Guest]: reports in Hindi you're preserving it for what to have it as a pretty thing
[Guest]: like a tiger in a zoo to say we haven't killed the last tiger whereas I don't
[Guest]: like the word preserve I think that anything is in if you have a fair
[Guest]: situation things will thrive on their own the point is we don't have a fair
[Guest]: situation so that's why these languages are all under threat and as to where
[Guest]: this is going to go it's in a sense it's another mass extinction like what we're
[Guest]: seeing that the only animals left are going to be livestock and pets you know
[Guest]: and the only languages left are the ones that are convenient to the world of tech
[Guest]: and big business so ultimately all these things that we've been talking about all
[Guest]: my answers to you in the last half an hour or so have taken it away from
[Guest]: linguistics and into socio-economics and politics because that's where the real
[Amit Varma]: fight is yeah that's a great point I mean what you're really pointing out is
[Amit Varma]: that listen you know if there is if society is ill then language is just a
[Amit Varma]: symptom it is not the cause it you can look at it and say that okay languages
[Amit Varma]: follow in this way or one language becomes dominant because of something
[Amit Varma]: else that's wrong there's nothing inherent in the language which of course
[Amit Varma]: is a case if I might pose a slight counterpoint to the not even a
[Amit Varma]: counterpoint I agree with you entirely but another way of sort of looking at
[Amit Varma]: this is that while everybody in India for example would want to know English
[Amit Varma]: for functional reasons and and more and more people also are talking about you
[Amit Varma]: know learning Mandarin or at one point learning Spanish would be a thing
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere in the world and all those are for functional reasons because you you
[Amit Varma]: you want to be part of that wider economy and be able to communicate but
[Amit Varma]: I'm not so sure that it is always at the expense of languages dying out like all
[Amit Varma]: our cinemas our regional cinemas are flourishing I used to be a big fan of
[Amit Varma]: tik-tok I even taught a brief course on tik-tok in Indian society and there it
[Amit Varma]: wasn't that people were expressing themselves in English or anything you
[Amit Varma]: could make out from their clothes and whatever that there was a lot of
[Amit Varma]: aspiration there but they were expressing themselves in local languages
[Amit Varma]: where sometimes even if I didn't understand the language I could still
[Amit Varma]: make out what's going on and I would find it hilarious and in a sense I would
[Amit Varma]: say that the more diversity you have in terms of entertainment and platforms and
[Amit Varma]: being able to express yourself the more chance the more diversity of expression
[Amit Varma]: you will have and therefore the chance that languages may survive like I think
[Amit Varma]: in your book if I remember correctly you also point out you're surprised at
[Amit Varma]: bhojpuri which was once not a major language has actually now become a big
[Amit Varma]: language in its own right is that correct do I remember correctly up to a
[Guest]: point in fact that's a very good example because bhojpuri has managed to command
[Guest]: politics and entertainment but that's only half the battle the big battle for
[Guest]: a language is does it command technology does it command the banking sector does
[Guest]: it command government that's easy of course but technology and science are
[Guest]: the things that really tell you if there's no scientific discourse in the
[Guest]: language it's a body blow to it like you look at places like the Philippines and
[Guest]: South Africa there's entertainment in local languages but they are visibly
[Guest]: traumatized because it's only reached the level of entertainment the the
[Guest]: really tough thing is where whether futuristic stuff like science and
[Guest]: technology are done in the language you can do any amount of bureaucracy you
[Guest]: could pass a law and say all government memos in whatever language but science
[Guest]: and technology once they're not China is way ahead they it's in Chinese Japan
[Guest]: it's in Japanese Iran it's in Farsi Turkey it's in Turkish all the
[Guest]: Scandinavian countries but in India that's this is an important point even
[Guest]: something like doing mathematics any Indian educated in English adds a column
[Guest]: of figures in English nobody else in the world can do that they a sweet will add
[Guest]: in Swedish and tell you the answer in English so this is in a way there are
[Guest]: features of a language which give it a little bit of a lease on life
[Guest]: entertainment literature even is one but without those top layers which reach
[Guest]: into the future you are you know riding for bad times and that's true of every
[Guest]: Indian language that's that's my worry we're not seeing it because just to see
[Guest]: so much literature so much stuff in print so much entertainment pop songs
[Guest]: it's a small part of the journey yeah no very wise points and thinking
[Amit Varma]: allowed like if I look at the country like China for example it strikes me
[Amit Varma]: that it this can both be a feature and a bug that on the one hand yes they have
[Amit Varma]: kind of managed to get where they are without relying on English to the point
[Amit Varma]: that now people in the West are saying hey we got to learn Mandarin and we got
[Amit Varma]: to figure this out in China's a big bar but at the same time they've been very
[Amit Varma]: insular and this also kind of comes at a cost that insularity is obviously again
[Amit Varma]: not a good thing you want to open yourself up to influences from
[Amit Varma]: everywhere the danger in opening or yourself up to influences from
[Amit Varma]: everywhere is that you can get run over by them especially when you know
[Amit Varma]: economies of scale come in as they do in the case of the Cavendish banana which
[Amit Varma]: like you said there are rational reasons for people to prefer the Cavendish
[Amit Varma]: bananas to other bananas that they last longer but nevertheless what happens is
[Amit Varma]: that diversity suffers and those other bananas go out of play and with India I
[Amit Varma]: think it's kind of a unique situation because English was a dominant the
[Amit Varma]: language for a long time under colonialism that the hangover of that
[Amit Varma]: sort of remained and other languages were kind of you know driven into
[Amit Varma]: different directions you know I mean how do you even reverse that now you you
[Amit Varma]: can't for example tell people that no your children must only be schooled in
[Amit Varma]: your local languages you can't do that because you'll be denying them
[Amit Varma]: opportunities it would again come down to the same thing of the elites creating
[Amit Varma]: a new kind of sort of apartheid as it were through language so I think in
[Amit Varma]: modern times is good that everyone learns English but I completely get your
[Amit Varma]: sort of worry about what happens to the other languages I mean I'm optimistic
[Amit Varma]: enough to hope that there'll be enough ways of people expressing themselves and
[Amit Varma]: for all of these to stay alive but you're shaking your head and you know I
[Guest]: don't see it I believe that it's a myth that bilingualism is a sustainable thing
[Guest]: in the old days when in India we had a very stable social structure and you
[Guest]: could know three or four languages in parallel we got the illusion that that's
[Guest]: something that Indians were very good at but the modern world is a little
[Guest]: different when people learn two languages or learn another language in
[Guest]: India English or the main regional language it's not quite the same as it
[Guest]: used to be before because there's an arrow of direction with it it isn't that
[Guest]: we plan to live our lives and our children's lives and their children's
[Guest]: lives in three languages we are in transit to a new one language we
[Guest]: already have children coming into the schools in India who only know English
[Guest]: and who might pick up a local language as a subject never read a single piece
[Guest]: of literature in it so can it be reversed is it good if you have ever
[Guest]: been in a class where 25% of the kids don't really know English you find that
[Guest]: there's a terrible illusion that just by spouting gibberish at them they will
[Guest]: learn it they will not so it's a very inefficient way to teach English in fact
[Guest]: if what you wanted to do was teach English the best way to teach English is
[Guest]: to not teach it in its medium but to allow children to learn about the world
[Guest]: and separately learn English now where that's going to take us is probably not
[Guest]: even a terribly different place as long as the world is centralizing more and
[Guest]: more language will do the same thing is it a good thing well for that you just
[Guest]: have to answer the question is it a good thing that we have no more wild animals
[Guest]: and it's only pets and livestock is it a good thing that we have less and less of
[Guest]: wild plants but only crops and gardens and lawns lawn the most absolutely
[Guest]: useless thing so these are choices that ultimately are not about language so in
[Guest]: my book I do say that when languages die it's like a canary taken into a mine
[Guest]: that it will die long before you can even feel that the air has changed so
[Guest]: it's another one of those marks of a mass extinction I don't have a strong
[Guest]: position on it and what we should do except to say that the word mass
[Guest]: extinction is a scary word and which it should give us a moment of pause to
[Guest]: think about where we going and the answer of course is not going to be
[Amit Varma]: linguistic I agree with all of that except that I think I'm less
[Amit Varma]: pessimistic but that could just be from my own sort of availability heuristic
[Amit Varma]: where I can look around me and you know I can speak multiple languages so can
[Amit Varma]: the people around me but it would be dangerous to assume that that is always
[Amit Varma]: necessarily going to be the case so we'll see how that pans out now one
[Amit Varma]: chapter that I really found fascinating in your book was about the Sanskrit
[Amit Varma]: words in Malayalam because my assumption was that hey listen the South Indian
[Amit Varma]: languages are completely separate they won't let you know Sanskrit in but then
[Amit Varma]: you point out how deeply Malayalam is sanskritized and in fact Malayalam is a
[Amit Varma]: beautiful language in that sense though I don't know it but because there's so
[Amit Varma]: many influences from so many places from from Arabic from all the you know the
[Amit Varma]: different kinds of traders Jews Arabs and Syrian Christians who kind of landed
[Amit Varma]: up there all of whom shaped the language in their own way but the
[Amit Varma]: sanskritization is really interesting because it really begins with what the
[Amit Varma]: happenstance of the way that a particular military battle works out
[Amit Varma]: like your quote K Sugandhan in a book that he wrote in Malayalam writing about
[Amit Varma]: how quote at just about this time in Kerala Buddhists were defeated by the
[Amit Varma]: Brahmin community in the Nair forces fighting on their side Buddhist and Jain
[Amit Varma]: groups who did not accept the dominance of the Brahmins saw a sharp decline in
[Amit Varma]: status and were assigned to Ezowa and Thiyarkas. I'm so apologies to
[Amit Varma]: everyone who might be offended by this Ezowa and Thiyarkas within a resurgent
[Amit Varma]: caste system while groups like the Nair's who had supported the Brahmins
[Amit Varma]: remained secure stop quote and later on your right quote sanskritized Malayalam
[Amit Varma]: appeared at exactly the same time that Brahminical Hinduism was being
[Amit Varma]: re-established in Kerala and when the Namudiri Brahmin community had every
[Amit Varma]: reason to celebrate its good fortune. So tell me a little bit about what happened
[Amit Varma]: here like was it a case of sort of a creolization of a new Malayalam coming
[Amit Varma]: up or was it just sort of very superficial series of loan words being
[Amit Varma]: taken from Sanskrit into Malayalam what exactly was a process by which a new
[Amit Varma]: Malayalam which was distinct from the old Malayalam came about and what was a
[Guest]: nature of this distinction? Okay I'll do it by comparing another language in a
[Guest]: southern part of India which is Urdu in the Deccan. In both of these languages
[Guest]: Deccani Urdu and modern Malayalam with Sanskrit words the people who first
[Guest]: started it were people who knew Sanskrit or Persian. So for them to it was not a
[Guest]: question of adding in Sanskrit. They knew the language they were getting away from
[Guest]: Sanskrit by putting Sanskrit in a matrix of the local language or putting Persian
[Guest]: words in Deccani in the matrix of the local language. So it's not an addition
[Guest]: it's a subtraction. It taking out all the verbs yeah also notice that in Malayalam
[Guest]: and in Rehta Urdu only nouns. So that whenever they stuck for a noun they went
[Guest]: to Persian or they went to Sanskrit. Sanskrit itself in the north you we tell
[Guest]: ourselves that the we have Sanskrit words they're actually prakrit words but
[Guest]: in Kerala it was actually Sanskrit where read that summer Sanskrit. The point is
[Guest]: that people who always wrote in Sanskrit or always wrote in Persian took the
[Guest]: decision not to do it but they did an English kind of thing. They kept adding
[Guest]: in all these words when they were stuck. So it was not realization it was
[Guest]: obviously something else but I didn't have a word for it but here I see two
[Guest]: things, two parts of India where nouns have come into something that is local
[Guest]: and the nouns have come from somewhere else. No verbs, no endings,
[Guest]: nothing, no grammar just the nouns. So Malayalam is still very much a South
[Guest]: Indian language but it has a bunch of nouns which come from Sanskrit. So what
[Guest]: to call that I haven't given it a name. Somebody should give it a name but it's
[Amit Varma]: not a prakrit. It's so fascinating how sort of nouns are the easiest thing to
[Amit Varma]: kind of transplant and the structure remains what it is or you know might
[Guest]: adopt slightly but nouns are just easiest and then you like you if I saw
[Guest]: you in a kurta pajama or I saw you in what you're wearing now there would be a
[Guest]: stark difference in how you would look but it would be the same you whereas if
[Guest]: there had been actual body transplants or you had a child who was half from
[Guest]: completely different community there you would see big differences but this is
[Amit Varma]: just clothing. If my child was a tiramisu bear for example, let's move on.
[Amit Varma]: In fact I'm not going to talk about any more of the chapters individually
[Amit Varma]: because we've already spoken for two and a half hours and I just want to ask
[Amit Varma]: broader questions now but implore all of my listeners to go and read the full
[Amit Varma]: book. I mean the chapters on the Indo-Aryan languages and then on Hindi and
[Amit Varma]: Urdu were absolutely fascinating. So I'm going to now kind of move on to my next
[Amit Varma]: broad question but before that you mentioned Khusro earlier, Amir Khusro and
[Amit Varma]: Amir Khusro is of course this fascinating character who was born in
[Amit Varma]: the year 1253 and he seems to sort of be a metaphor for what is happening in the
[Amit Varma]: Indian languages itself. As you point out, quote, as a young boy Khusro is said to
[Amit Varma]: have learned Turki, the language was not yet called Uzbek, Arabic, Persian and
[Amit Varma]: Sanskrit and he also picked up various dialects spoken in the Delhi region such
[Amit Varma]: as Awadhi, Brajbhasha, Bhojpuri and the new language of the urban gentry known
[Amit Varma]: as Khariboli or Dehlavi or simply as Hindi. The name Urdu would only come with
[Amit Varma]: the poet Mushafi by the late 18th century. Stop quote. And then you quote
[Amit Varma]: this beautiful lines by him where he writes about his peer Hazrat Nizamuddin
[Amit Varma]: Auliya where he says, and very resonant words and easy for me to
[Amit Varma]: understand even now in this current time. But when I later read Ghalib and as you
[Amit Varma]: point out most of Ghalib's work is in Persian and only some of it is in Urdu
[Amit Varma]: but even the what Ghalib writes in Urdu is very heavily Persianized. Very cryptic.
[Amit Varma]: Very Persianized and you've pointed out about how during this time his mentor
[Amit Varma]: initially was Bahadur Shah Zafar who himself was like a pensioner kept
[Amit Varma]: captive in the Red Fort by the British. So Ghalib did not want to piss the
[Amit Varma]: British off and therefore he kept it cryptic. More Persian went into his
[Amit Varma]: poetry as it were and at this point in the 19th century over a period of a few
[Amit Varma]: decades what happens is that Urdu gets more and more Persianized and Hindi gets
[Amit Varma]: more and more Sanskritized because at the same time there is this political
[Amit Varma]: movement happening where you know Alok Rai has written a book called Hindi
[Amit Varma]: nationalism on this where the whole movement is that Hindi is our pure
[Amit Varma]: language and we must strip foreign elements from it which is not of course
[Amit Varma]: the case. It was never a pure form. It just evolved as a combination of all
[Amit Varma]: these various things. So Hindi is Sanskritized in the way that nobody
[Amit Varma]: actually speaks like that kind of Shudh Hindi is not spoken anywhere per se and
[Amit Varma]: equally Urdu gets Persianized for a variety of different reasons like that
[Amit Varma]: and they diverge even though to begin with they are the same language
[Amit Varma]: fundamentally and they diverge. In fact you've pointed out how Munshi Premchand
[Amit Varma]: son Amrit Rai wrote a book about criticizing Ghalib and what he did with
[Amit Varma]: this beautiful language that he just Persianized it heavily which seems at
[Amit Varma]: some level to me to be the equivalent of if someone was to you
[Amit Varma]: know take regular spoken English and just put in a lot of big Latinate words
[Amit Varma]: and it would be like I think a similar kind of effect would happen and some
[Amit Varma]: people will of course do that to signal that you know I know this language so
[Amit Varma]: well and all of that but a similar kind of thing would happen. This just shows
[Amit Varma]: how politics plays such a huge part in language and independent India has also
[Amit Varma]: of course grappled with that and in that sense perhaps you know the fact that we
[Amit Varma]: have English at least is a blessing because otherwise you know people might
[Amit Varma]: have tried to impose Hindi on the southern states which would not have
[Guest]: gone down well with good reason. Not the kind of Hindi that they were going to
[Guest]: impose, definitely not. Notice that the Hindi that came up in the Shudh Hindi was
[Guest]: like in Malayalam, Tatsama Hindi. It was never the case in the past. The kind of
[Guest]: words that came were from Prakrit, never from Sanskrit. So to just barge in there
[Guest]: and put Sanskrit words was a failure to notice how language had formed in the
[Guest]: past and it wasn't done by Indians initially. It was done by the British
[Guest]: because they were very unhappy with well the importance of the language spoken by
[Guest]: their predecessors so they were trying to break these languages and they
[Guest]: managed to do it. However, when you talk of Ghalib, let's remember he didn't only
[Guest]: write Ghazals and poetry. He also wrote, I remember going in fact into the Ghalib
[Guest]: Institute, they have a library, to get out his collected letters and which were
[Guest]: collected actually 50 years after he died and they give a bit of an overview
[Guest]: of how he felt in those days because they were not published as such and you
[Guest]: would understand most of the Urdu. It's nothing like his poetry. His
[Guest]: poetry is difficult not because of the language per se. He's being very devious
[Guest]: in how he frames his thoughts. It's a puzzle. He's writing like Zen koans for
[Guest]: you and if you, in fact, if you live with a Ghazal in your head for years, its
[Guest]: meaning is going to change depending upon the things that are happening in
[Guest]: your own life. So, he did have another Urdu which was much more normal, much
[Guest]: more down-to-earth. But that gets lost because that's not what many
[Guest]: people look for in him. But yes, it's very hard to imagine that the British were
[Guest]: successfully splitting the old Mughal elite from the modern Hindu citizens of
[Guest]: their empire without it having a repercussion on the language. So, they
[Guest]: managed to split the language and people began to think that this strange thing
[Guest]: written in Persian script is not the same thing as what we have that has
[Guest]: borrowed a whole lot of new Sanskrit words. So, again, politics and somebody
[Guest]: intervening and the famous term divided rule. They did that. Language is just one
[Amit Varma]: area. No, and you've actually reproduced in your book one of Ghalib's letters. So,
[Amit Varma]: which reads so differently like someone is asking him about the destruction of
[Amit Varma]: Delhi and he begins with the words, Bhai, kya pooshte ho, kya likho? And then he goes on in
[Amit Varma]: language that anyone sitting today can really understand and relate to and we
[Amit Varma]: might use some of those, some of the same language ourselves while his, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Ghazals and all are quite different which is fascinating. So, this is very
[Amit Varma]: interesting how the British, you know, create this sharp political divide and
[Amit Varma]: so on. So, when we look at modern-day politics also, for example, especially in
[Amit Varma]: these trying times, you know, and this is not just a question purely about
[Amit Varma]: language but as someone who's observed society over a while, who has seen larger
[Amit Varma]: political trends play out, in fact, through the centuries. So, in that
[Amit Varma]: capacity, like it is very easy, for example, to sit in the present moment and
[Amit Varma]: be despondent about the current trends that are going on but equally someone
[Amit Varma]: may just sit back and say, no, listen, we've been here before, it's okay, we'll
[Amit Varma]: get through this. There are things within society that are stronger than these
[Amit Varma]: currents that are there right now in our politics. So, how does one think about it?
[Amit Varma]: Like earlier, you were a little more pessimistic than I was about the
[Amit Varma]: survival of some of these languages and what was being done to them because
[Amit Varma]: being an expert in languages when you write the kind of book that you have
[Amit Varma]: done also means that you are also writing about politics and society and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. So, I'm going to take a step outside language for a moment and
[Amit Varma]: just ask you on what is your feeling about all of this as someone who is from
[Amit Varma]: Delhi as, you know, as you tell people who you've been here for more than 40
[Amit Varma]: years but equally you have a wider view of the whole world but you also have a
[Amit Varma]: deeper view of India itself because of all your incredible insights in this, as
[Amit Varma]: your incredible insights in this book indicate about both the language and the
[Amit Varma]: society. What is your sense of what is going on and what role does language
[Amit Varma]: play on it? Like, as an aside, like sometimes when I see our Prime Minister's
[Amit Varma]: speeches on TV, it seems to me that he's speaking a certain shuddh kind of Hindi,
[Amit Varma]: not to the same extent as someone like Vajpayee did a couple of decades ago but
[Amit Varma]: he's speaking a certain shuddh kind of Hindi and not an everyday lingo kind of
[Amit Varma]: language where, you know, he would famously say mitro instead of dosto as
[Amit Varma]: people would say in common speech and, you know, and I don't understand how that
[Amit Varma]: goes down so well among so many people who don't speak the language but anyway
[Amit Varma]: that's a digression but in general, you know, with that wider understanding of
[Amit Varma]: history and with all the frames that you've gathered, when you look at this
[Guest]: present time, how do you feel? See, since I told you earlier with language, what
[Guest]: worries me is that it's all, all the tributaries are coming to one single
[Guest]: river. In the past, there were many tributaries going to many rivers and we
[Guest]: said we've seen this before, we can go ahead but when it's all coming into one,
[Guest]: we're seeing something a little bit scary and as to where this goes in the
[Guest]: future, I think we're beginning to see pushback. I don't regard the whole COVID
[Guest]: experience as a one-off. It's just the first thing that's being done to shake
[Guest]: our entire notion of where we are going and they're going to be others. There's
[Guest]: no way there will not be pushback against this rollercoaster we're on,
[Guest]: taking us towards a more and more centralized world with a few billionaires
[Guest]: and others completely on the outside. I'm not even talking about just India, this
[Guest]: is the world. We are in for a lot of surprises. If you think of what Zoom
[Guest]: classes have done to education, you suddenly realize that I'm not very sure
[Guest]: how we're stepping out of the world we've constructed in the last two years. So a
[Guest]: lot of things are going to, people are going to be ripe for thinking afresh
[Guest]: about a lot of things. Is it nice to travel all the way across Delhi to
[Guest]: school? Maybe some local things are a better way, maybe it's nice to be able to
[Guest]: be going places in your daily life where you can walk or cycle, where maybe it's
[Guest]: nice for children to be able to be close to school and to go without their
[Guest]: parents' intervention. In fact, the more centralized the world has been, the more
[Guest]: children have needed their parents to completely shepherd them through it. So
[Guest]: what I'm trying to say is we've reached a point where the surprises are going to
[Guest]: start coming and we are not really primed for them. We're going to have to
[Guest]: react in some way. So on the political front, what's happening now is similar to
[Guest]: what's happening in many parts of the world and what's going to happen next, I
[Guest]: am thinking it's going to be surprises because it cannot continue. We cannot
[Guest]: have more and more inequality, more and more strife among communities. Something
[Guest]: has got to give and it's going to give, as Steve Gold would have said, in a
[Guest]: punctuated sort of a way. Sudden things are going to happen and we're going to
[Guest]: face shocks and how language will respond to that is to what extent these
[Guest]: shocks force us to fragment into more manageable zones. Remember the 12th
[Guest]: century in India and Europe, both places were about breaking up over large
[Guest]: expanses of power. Latin, Prakrit, Sanskrit, all fragmented into smaller
[Guest]: manageable units. It happened then. So I don't know what will happen in the
[Guest]: future except that this is one of the possibilities. But we are, as I said in
[Amit Varma]: the book, racing towards a stop sign. That's fascinating, the notion
[Amit Varma]: that we might be heading towards a kind of punctuated equilibria where
[Amit Varma]: everything just sort of changes. And I would hope it changes. I mean, there is a
[Amit Varma]: possibility that it changes for the better. You know, looking at our
[Amit Varma]: politics, I tend to be more pessimistic than optimistic. But when you think of
[Amit Varma]: language, I think the biggest pushback is actually coming from our artists and
[Amit Varma]: writers. I think of Hussain Haidri's poem Hindustani Musalma, Varun Grover Kaagaz
[Amit Varma]: Nahi Dikhayenge, where they are using language in a beautiful, relatable way to
[Amit Varma]: express dissent. You see the amazing work our cartoonists are doing, in fact,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, language is not even such a big part of that. So I think there
[Amit Varma]: is hope in art and there is hope in common people. But you know, but who
[Amit Varma]: knows? Let's see. I'll end by sort of asking you a question I often ask all my
[Amit Varma]: guests. It's almost become a meme of the show that people want to know what books
[Amit Varma]: to read about particular subjects. So when my guest recommends books, they'll
[Amit Varma]: often go out and buy those, post pictures of those on Twitter. All of that happens,
[Amit Varma]: which is something I absolutely love and encourage because we all should really
[Amit Varma]: read more. So what I'm going to ask you to do, and I don't want to restrict you
[Amit Varma]: to books about language, which is the obvious thing, because your book is not
[Amit Varma]: just about language. It is about so much else. I mean, it's I mean, it's one of
[Amit Varma]: those books which, you know, I was telling you before the show that I often
[Amit Varma]: say that to understand India's history, two books that you must read by authors
[Amit Varma]: I've done episodes with are, you know, Early Indians by Tony Joseph and India
[Amit Varma]: moving by Chinmay Tumbe on the history of migration. And I absolutely include
[Amit Varma]: your book now as a third prong of that. And I'm sure there are many more prongs
[Amit Varma]: and much for us to discover. But I felt that in so many different ways, which I
[Amit Varma]: couldn't even touch the surface of during this episode, your book opened my
[Amit Varma]: eyes to so many things and gave me so much to think about. So on similar lines,
[Amit Varma]: if somebody reads your book and says that, hey, this was great, I want to read
[Amit Varma]: more books like this. What would you recommend? Like, are there any books
[Amit Varma]: which change the way you look at the world? What are the sort of books that
[Amit Varma]: you feel so enthusiastic about that you want to throw it at people and say, read
[Guest]: it now? Okay, they will not be in linguistics. But there is a style of
[Guest]: writing, which I think all these people, Tony Joseph probably, I would say, me, I
[Guest]: hope. It's called science narratives, where you're posing very complex scientific
[Guest]: issues, but writing it in somewhat accessible style, which involves a
[Guest]: certain amount of walking around the corridors of your hospital. You see it
[Guest]: with somebody like Siddharth Mukherjee. I particularly liked his first book, The
[Guest]: Emperor of All Maladies. That's a style. But for stuff that gives me a lot of
[Guest]: food for thought, there's a writer I like, and his name is David Quammen. And he
[Guest]: writes on issues to do with biology. And the earlier books, of course, the
[Guest]: first one that I would say I really love is The Song of the Dodo. It's talking
[Guest]: about extinctions and comparing extinctions in that situation to the
[Guest]: extinctions of language that I work on. And then, of course, his latest
[Guest]: book, unless he's written after that, is called The Tangled Tree. So you're
[Guest]: looking at how genes are influenced by invading viruses, bacteria, etc. And in a
[Guest]: way, it's not just a style of the science narrative that I'm hoping I am trying, I
[Guest]: am trying my best to get to, but the issues are very similar. Extinctions are
[Guest]: something we worry about. Predators are things that we worry about. Predator
[Guest]: languages. So, and he's written a number of books, so you can go through that and
[Guest]: read about quite a number of things that impact language or are parallel to the
[Guest]: problems that we have. So like, just as I went to Stephen Jay Gould to read about
[Guest]: what would be a natural life cycle for a language, I go to somebody like Quammen
[Guest]: to see how this is posed in a style that makes a decent book, that somebody can
[Guest]: actually read extremely difficult things in and still not be overwhelmed by it.
[Guest]: You see the kind of style that I'm thinking of. I remember reading books by
[Guest]: Ravela Thapar and Irfan Habib, and there was this lovely feeling at the end of
[Guest]: the book of just going through the notes just as a standalone thing because I
[Guest]: felt the book was not enough. I wanted more, and there was more. There were the
[Guest]: notes. So that was another thing that I think in my own book I tried to get
[Guest]: because these were also people who were looking at the same kinds of issues in
[Guest]: terms of history. So I'm looking at style and patterns, content. These are the kind
[Guest]: of people I would want to recommend. Yeah, and that's such a lovely thought, the
[Amit Varma]: thought of, you know, looking at the end notes of a book or looking at the
[Amit Varma]: bibliography and entering rabbit holes, which I keep, you know, doing a lot of
[Amit Varma]: the time. And you mentioned David Quammen. I mean, the only book I've read
[Amit Varma]: of his is Spillover, which actually came out a few years ago, but it's about
[Amit Varma]: zoonotic viruses. So the moment sort of COVID struck, I started reading up on it
[Amit Varma]: and that's a lovely book as well. So, Peggy, what can I say? Thank you so much.
[Guest]: I know that you're traveling right now. You're in Mexico right now on the way to
[Amit Varma]: San Francisco. Yeah, so it's so kind of you to, you know, share your time and
[Amit Varma]: insights with me. And I'm deeply grateful and deeply grateful not just for the
[Amit Varma]: episode, but thank you for writing this book because it's just so eye-opening
[Amit Varma]: and wonderful. So thank you so much. It's been a pleasure. If you enjoyed
[Amit Varma]: listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online or
[Amit Varma]: offline and pick up Peggy Mohan's wonderful book, Wanderer's King's
[Amit Varma]: Merchants, the story of India through its languages. Do also check out the show
[Amit Varma]: notes where you can enter plenty of rabbit holes. Peggy doesn't happen to be
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter, smart woman, but I am. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma,
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at
[Amit Varma]: SeenUnseen.in. Thank you for listening.